THE WIZARD

OF MENLO PARK



ALSO BY RANDALL STROSS

eBoys

The Microsoft Way

Steve Jobs and the NeXT Big Thing

Bulls in the China Shop

The Stubborn Earth

Technology and Society
in Twentieth-Century America (ed.)



THE WIZARD

OF

MENLO PARK

How THOMAS ALVA EDISON

INVENTED THE MODERN WORLD

RANDALL STROSS

CROWN PUBLISHERS / NEW YORK



Copyright  2007 by Randall E. Stross

All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Publishers, an imprint of the Crown

Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com

Crown is a trademark and the Crown colophon is a registered trademark of
Random House, Inc.

Photo insert, page 1: (top, left) Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-98067
Photo insert, page 6: (top) Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-2080

All photos unless otherwise noted: Courtesy of U.S. Department of the
Interior, National Park Service, Edison National Historic Site

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stross, Randall E.

The Wizard of Menlo Park: how Thomas Alva Edison

invented the modern world / Randall E. Stross.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Edison, Thomas A. (Thomas Alva), 1847-1931. 2.lnventors

United States-Biography. 3. Electric engineers-United
States-Biography. I. Title.

TK140.E3S762007

621.3092-dc22

[B] 2006028808

ISBN 978-1-4000-4762-8

Printed in the United States of America

Design by Leonard W. Henderson

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2

First Edition



 



 



CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 1

PART I: SUCCESS 11

 13

2  39

3  59

4  76

5  98

6  119

PART II: LIFE AFTER 141

7  143

8  165

9 FUN 189

10  211

I I  233

12  259

 283

 291

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 362

INDEX 365



 



INTRODUCTION

T,
HOMAS ALVA EDISON is the patron saint of electric light, elec
tric power, and music-on-demand, the grandfather of the Wired
World, great-grandfather of iPod Nation. He was the person

who flipped the switch. Before Edison, darkness. After Edison, media
saturated modernity.

Well, not exactly. The heroic biography we were fed as schoolchildren
does have its limitations, beginning with the omission of other inven
tors who played critical roles-not just Edison's gifted assistants, but
also his accomplished competitors. What's most interesting about the
standard Edison biography that we grew up with is not that it is heroic
but that it is outsized, a projected image quite distinct from the man
who stood five foot nine. Once brought into being, Edison's image in
habited its own life and acted autonomously in ways that its namesake
could not control. Edison is famously associated with the beginnings of
movies, which is where the modern business of celebrity begins. But he
deserves to be credited with another, no less important, discovery re
lated to celebrity that he made early in his own public life, accidentally:
the application of celebrity to business.

The celebrity is distinguished from the merely well known by the pub
lic's bottomless desire for closeness, for learning anything and everything
about the person. The first celebrities in American history were political
and military figures, the Founders and Lincoln. Treating them as objects
of fascination, the public experienced a feeling of personal, and wholly



2 / INTRODUCTION

spurious, closeness. In the 1870s, Edison joined the ranks of larger-than
life demigods, making way for the civilian celebrity. Other nineteenth
century figures, like Mark Twain and P. T. Barnum, also gained fame on
a scale impossible to imagine in an earlier time for those who worked
outside of politics, but Edison's celebrity exceeded everyone else's. He
achieved it well before he and others had created the technology to mass
produce visual intimacy on a larger-than-life scale. When Edison initially
became famous, the public could see him only with images conjured by
newspaper text, supplemented with the occasional line drawing. During
his lifetime, however, the technology for depicting images advanced rap
idly. His face became so well known that an envelope mailed on a lark
from North Carolina with nothing but his picture on it to serve as both
name and address arrived in his hands in New Jersey a few weeks later.

No one of the time would have predicted that it would be an inven
tor, of all occupations, who would become the cynosure of the age. In

retrospect, fame may appear to be a justly earned reward for the inven
tor of practical electric light-yet Edison's fame came before light. It
was conferred for an earlier invention: the phonograph. Who would
have guessed that the announcement of the phonograph's invention
would be sufficient to propel him in a matter of a few days from obscurity
into the firmament above? Anyone of dozens of technical breakthroughs
that had come before had much greater impact on the U.S. economy.
Their creators were more likely candidates for the top rank of fame. Eli
Whitney's cotton gin, or his muskets made with interchangeable parts,
Robert Fulton's steamboat, John Jethro Wood's iron-tipped plough,
Cyrus McCormick's reaper, Charles Goodyear's rubber-manufacturing
process, Samuel Morse's telegraph, Elisha Graves Otis's elevator, Lucien
Smith's barbed wire, and Alexander Graham Bell's telephone, which ap
peared one year before the phonograph-these were prior inventions
that fundamentally changed the U.S. economy. Why would the phono
graph, of all things, have made its inventor famous beyond imagining?
More mysterious is that it was not the phonograph itself-it would
take two decades before the machine was ready to be actually commer
cialized on a mass scale-but the mere idea of the phonograph that in-



INTRODUCTION \3

stantly seized the imagination of everyone who heard of it, inspiring es
sayists to expect machines capable of thinking as well as speaking.

Edison's admirers endowed him with fantastical powers that would

permit him to invent anything he wished (one humorist suggested that
he invent "a pocketbook that will always contain a dollar or two").
Edison did not himself lack for self-confidence and held fast to the con

viction that he could remove any technical obstacle that impeded his
progress, no matter what field of invention he explored. This conviction
would lead him into blind alleys, but it also led to astonishing successes,
planned and unplanned. More than anything else, the utterly fearless
range of his experimental activities draws our attention today.

Fearlessness was needed when he elected to become a full-time inven

tor at the tender age of twenty-two, a bold step for a young man with

out family money. Both of the two previous generations of Edisons had
been politically active and cursed with unfortunate luck, having to
move permanently and far away to avoid the consequences that fol
lowed from backing a losing cause. Edison's grandfather had been a
Loyalist in New Jersey during the War for Independence and had
moved the family to Canada at the end of the war. Two years before
Edison was born, his Canadian father, Samuel, an innkeeper by trade
and Thomas Paine-like firebrand by temperament, backed an insurrec
tion against the Canadian provincial government. When the uprising
failed, Samuel had to flee for his life without his wife and four children
and headed south to the United States. He landed in a canal town,

Milan, Ohio, eight miles south of Lake Erie, where his family rejoined
him. He dabbled in shingle manufacturing, land speculation, and truck
farming, prospering by small-town standards as regional trade grew,
then losing his gains when railroads took canal traffic away.

Thomas Alva Edison-known as "AI" as a child-would be the last

of the seven children born to his mother, Nancy. High infant and child
hood mortality in the mid-nineteenth century is encapsulated in the
family history: only three of his six siblings survived beyond the age of
six. All three were in their teens when he arrived on 11 February
1847-his oldest sister was eighteen-so he was soon the only child left



4 / INTRODUCTION

living at his parents' house. When he was seven, the family moved to
Port Huron, Michigan, a frontier town offering opportunities in lum
bering and real estate speculation. His mother, a former schoolteacher,
provided the homeschooling that constituted the entirety of his educa
tion, other than two brief stints at local schools. These circumstances,
along with his progressive loss of hearing, nurtured the autodidact in
Edison's makeup.

His father introduced his son to the highly esteemed writings of
Paine, but young Edison did not inherit his father's interest in politics.
He did, however, show an entrepreneurial bent that resembled his fa
ther's. Before Edison, the inventor, made a precocious appearance, Edi
son, the boy tycoon, had emerged. The opportunities he discovered as a
twelve-year-old wheeler-dealer were opened when he persuaded his
mother to let his home studies end so that he could take a position as

newsboy on a train that ran from Port Huron to Detroit. Once on
board, he saw that he could buy goods cheaply in the big city and retail
them in little Port Huron at a nice markup. He opened two stores-a
newsstand and a fresh-produce stand-and hired two other boys to
staff them and share in the profits. Loading a U.S. mail car with his bas
kets of vegetables, without charge, would likely have brought the disap
proving attention of some authority figure on the railroad. But here,
too, young Edison showed a gift for knowing how to enlist the coopera
tion of everyone: He offered to the wives of the engineers and trainmen
the fresh blackberries, butter, and other delectables at the same low
wholesale prices that he had paid.

At the age of fifteen, Edison expanded into newspaper publishing,
using a galley-proof press and worn type he bought secondhand and set
up in the baggage car of the train. When a British passenger happened
to catch a glimpse of the adolescent publisher at work, he bought the
entire run of Edison's Weekly Herald as souvenirs, and Edison later
heard he planted mention in the London Times that it was the first
newspaper in the world to be printed on a train in motion.

In his spare time, Edison spent time with a small chemistry labora
tory that he set up in the baggage car. Flammable chemicals did not



INTRODUCTION \5

travel as well as the printing press. When a bottle of phosphorus fell
and set the car on fire, the conductor ejected Edison, his chemicallabo
ratory, and his printing press. The other diversion that occupied Edison
every spare moment was telegraphy's Morse code, which he tried to ab
sorb on his own by osmosis, sitting close by the telegraph instruments
in railroad offices, listening and watching. Edison fell into the good
graces of James MacKenzie, a station agent, when he rescued MacKen
zie's young son, who was playing obliviously on the tracks when an un
coupled freight car rolled toward the tyke. Edison happened to be
looking out the window just in time to dash out and swoop the child
out of harm's way-but not in time to prevent the child's mother from
catching sight of the near fatal miss and fainting. This was the tale that
was told, and it invites being treated as apocryphal were it not for corrob
orating facts and MacKenzie's palpable gratitude. He became Edison's
personal Morse code tutor, and Edison soon became proficient.

Edison's own account of the rescue of the MacKenzie boy is matter
of-fact and free of heroic embellishment ("I luckily came out just in
time"). It was told as the preamble to the main event, which was
MacKenzie's taking "considerable pains to teach me" and his own will
ingness to practice Morse code "about 18 hours a day." (Edison's ca
pacity for extended bursts of work would be his principal vanity his
entire life.) This intensive tutelage soon enabled him to become a pro
fessional telegraph operator.

At the same time he told the rescue story, he also told one in which

his own role was anything but heroic. He had secured his first paid posi
tion as a telegraph operator in the local Western Union office, then, at
the age of sixteen, gained a position with the Grand Trunk Railroad,
which assigned him to the night shift in a station at Stratford Junction,
Ontario. One night, he received instructions to hold a freight train that
would soon arrive-on the other side, another train had already left the
last station and was approaching from the opposite direction on the
single track. When Edison headed out into the yard to find the signal
man, the train that he was supposed to halt flew past, unaware. He ran
back into the office and reported, "I couldn't hold her." The telegraphed



6 / INTRODUCTION

reply was succinct: "Hell." At this point, there was one remaining chance
for Edison to reprise his role as the hero who averted catastrophe: If he
could get to the place along the route where the daytime operator was
presently sleeping, a signal could still be set to prevent the impending
collision. The only way to reach it would be by racing in the darkness
on foot. Edison set off but never made it in time: "I fell in a culvert and

was knocked senseless."

Carnage was avoided that night because the track was straight and
the two engineers saw each other in time to avoid the collision. After
ward, Edison and his immediate supervisor were summoned to the
main office in Toronto. The general superintendent was interested in
knowing why the supervisor had given a sixteen-year-old a position of
such grave life-and-death responsibility. As for Edison, the superinten
dent threatened to send him off to prison for his criminal negligence
while on duty. Edison did not wish to test the seriousness of the superin
tendent's threat, and when, in the midst of this dressing-down, three
self-important visitors happened to arrive at the office ("English swells,"
in Edison's description) and created a momentary diversion, he made a
hasty exit. He caught the first freight train that would take him to sanc
tuary, the United States.

The incident did not keep him from landing his next telegraph opera
tor job, in Adrian, Michigan. For the next five years, he hopped from
one post to the next-Fort Wayne; Indianapolis; Cincinnati; Memphis;
Louisville; Cincinnati again-as a member of the fraternity of "tramp"
operators. They were young, single men who were a peripatetic, but
close-knit, fraternity. They came to know one another if not by meeting
in person, then by their distinctive patterns of tapping when sending
messages. They did not stay in one place long. One or the other would
move to a new post, then, when their movements later brought them
back together, they renewed acquaintance. In a rare surviving letter
that Edison wrote home as a nineteen-year-old, he was conscious that
he had matured since his parents had last seen him: "I have growed
Considerably-I don't look much like a Boy Now."

Within the club, two talents were prized most highly: technical skill



INTRODUCTION \ 7

when operating the apparatus and creativity when devising practical
jokes for the unaware. Edison was highly regarded by his peers on both
counts. He had great prowess as a telegraph receiver (but not as a sender).
He had diligently investigated how to write as fast as possible (by writing
each letter extremely small, and separately, without wasting time with
cursive connectors). When receiving, he could always stay ahead of trans
missions from the speediest sender. He also came to be known for inven
tiveness in the good cause of fun. Batteries used for the telegraph
apparatus were plentiful, and many of his pranks involved electric
shock-these stunts gain interest in retrospect, knowing as we do of Edi
son's future work on the ultimate instrument of shock, the electric chair.
In Cincinnati in 1867, Edison purchased an induction coil that was suffi
ciently powerful to "twist the arms & clinch the hands of a man so he
couldn't let go of the electrodes." He and a colleague connected one elec
trode to a washstand in the roundhouse and grounded the other, then
climbed onto the roof and peered down through a hole they had drilled
for the purpose. The first person came in, stepped on the wet floor while
washing, closed the circuit-and up went his hands, without volition. A
succession of unwary victims were similarly shocked, and all were con
founded; no one guessed the cause. Edison commented about observing
the events from his perch above: "We enjoyed the sport immensely."

Reaching the top rank of skilled operators did not give Edison much
satisfaction. He was increasingly devoting time to tinkering with tele
graphic apparatus, looking for ways to gain speed, in sending and me
chanically printing messages. He secured permission from office managers
to use idle equipment and scavenge discards, and he used his wages to

purchase the tools and equipment he could not beg or borrow.
When he landed in Boston in 1868 to work as a night-shift operator at

the main Western Union office, he arrived hungry and penniless, and
when he presented himself at the office upon arrival, he was, in the words
of an operator who witnessed the scene, "the worst-looking specimen of
humanity I ever saw." He wore jeans that were six inches too short, a
jacket that he had bought off the back of a railroad laborer on his trip
across country, and a wide-brimmed hat with a tear on the side, through



8 / INTRODUCTION

which his ear poked out. When he finished his trial test-easily-and
reached the boardinghouse where he would stay with fellow operators he
knew from earlier, the first question he had for them was this: Would their
boss permit him to tinker during his free time? The answer was yes. Edi
son soon sought investors who would provide funds in exchange for half
interest in resulting patents. Three individuals quickly stepped forward to
help him work on various projects, such as improved telegraph transmit
ters, a stock-price printer, a fire alarm that used telegraph technology, and
an electric vote recorder for Congress and state legislatures.

All of this work was carried on by a twenty-one-year-old experiment
ing part-time. Edison filed patent applications as fast as the ideas ar
rived. The first application that was successful-the first of 1,093 U.S.
patents he would accumulate-was for the legislative chambers's vote
recorder, which could shorten tabulation by hours. With buttons pro
vided at each member's desk, the chamber's speaker could see twin dials
displaying running totals for "aye" and "nay." The deficiencies of the
manual voting system seemed obvious to Edison, but not to his pro
spective customers. When Edison and his investor angel met with a
politically savvy operator whose recommendation would be needed to
secure a sale in the Capitol, the insider's reaction to Edison's invention
was undisguised horror. The minority faction would not embrace an ex
pedited voting process because it eliminated the opportunity to lobby
for votes, nor would the majority want a change, either. The vote
recorder was a bust, and the lesson Edison drew from the experience
was that invention should not be pursued as an exercise in technical
cleverness, but should be shaped by commercial needs.

The vote recorder had temporarily pulled Edison away from his core
expertise, telegraphy, which was that day's preeminent high-tech field.
Traders in stocks and gold were keenly interested in whatever means
provided them with faster communications that gave them a competi
tive edge. Anyone who helped them gain an edge was paid a premium,
and a bright telegraphy expert like twenty-two-year-old Edison could
make a nice living inventing and manufacturing improved equipment.
Or so at least it seemed to him. After a year in Boston, Edison took the



INTRODUCTION \9

big step and quit his day job, which happened to be a night job, resign
ing his position at Western Union to try to make his living as a full-time
inventor and manufacturer in the field of telegraphic equipment.

Judging by the accounts of his contemporaries, at the time he set off
on his own in 1869 he was not just respected but also well liked, so
much so that he could work harder than everyone else without antago

nizing his peers. He was open to participating in long bull sessions at his
boardinghouse and had opinions he did not keep to himself. A fellow
boarder, a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, later
described the clear division of labor in their long conversations. Edison
did the talking, and he, the listening. Still, Edison remained wholly un
pretentious and clubbable. He was also trusted, the person who on one
occasion could collect contributions from more than fifty coworkers
and friends to get a gift for a departing employee without anyone wor
rying that the funds would end up in his pocket. Trust was not un
related to Edison's temperance, a characteristic rare in that circle.

Edison was disinclined to drink with his fellows because it would pull
him off track, interfering with the greater pleasures: tinkering, learning,
problem solving. His outlook was secular and matter-of-fact. He once
got in trouble when sacrilegiously transcribing "[.C." whenever "Jesus
Christ" came across the wire; he could not understand the fuss over his

"J.e." when"B.e." for designating historical time was regarded as per
fectly acceptable. His early career was fueled by something other than
resentments, which he lacked. Whatever advantages in education or fi
nancial resources that other inventors enjoyed were of no interest to
him. Nor did he regard his partial deafness as an impediment. He
claimed that the deafness was actually an advantage, freeing him from
time-wasting small talk and giving him undisturbed time to "think out

my problems." Late in life he would say that he was fortunate to have
been spared "all the foolish conversation and other meaningless sounds
that normal people hear."

Immune to the clanging sounds of the city, Edison's ears provided him
with a soothing insulation, better suited to "the conditions of modern
city life" than those of the average person's. The insulation would also



10/ INTRODUCTION

prove helpful when he became famous, partially protecting him from the
unceasing demands from strangers for conversation and speeches.

Edison's fame came suddenly, while he was still young. Between the
ages of thirty and thirty-five, he became the first hybrid celebrity-inventor.
This book examines how he became one of the most famous people in
the world, and once fame arrived, how he sought to use it for his own
ends, with uneven success. He could act as master of his own image only
sometimes. He did not understand the power of the press to shape the
life story of the celebrity, to create (and destroy, should it wish to do so).

When he stood on the threshold of fame, he could not have predicted
what would follow-and he did not shy away. He directed assistants to
maintain newspaper clippings about him, a practice that he would main
tain his entire life. The existence of those scrapbooks suggests that Edison
gave up an appealing attribute of his young adulthood: his utter indiffer
ence to the expectations of others. After "Edison" became a household

name, he would pretend that nothing had changed, that he was as indiffer
ent as ever. But this stance is unconvincing. He did care, at least most of the
time. When he tried to burnish his public image with exaggerated claims of
progress in his laboratory, for example, he demonstrated a hunger for
credit unknown in his earliest tinkering. The mature Edison, post-fame, is
most appealing whenever he returned to acting spontaneously, without
weighing what action would serve to enhance his public image.

One occasion when Edison cast off the expectations of others in his
middle age was when he met Henry Stanley, of "Dr. Livingstone, I pre
sume" fame, and Stanley's wife, who had come to visit him at his labo
ratory. Edison provided a demonstration of the phonograph, which
Stanley had never heard before. Stanley asked, in a low voice and slow
cadence, "Mr. Edison, if it were possible for you to hear the voice of any
man whose name is known in the history of the world, whose voice
would you prefer to hear?"

"Napoleon's," replied Edison without hesitation.
"No, no," Stanley said piously, "I should like to hear the voice of our

Savior. "

"Well," explained Edison, "you know, I like a hustler."



PAR T I

1869-1882



 



CHAPTER ONE



1869-1877

HAVING
ONE'S OWN shop, working on projects of one's own

choosing, making enough money today so one could do the
same tomorrow: These were the modest goals of Thomas Edi-

son when he struck out on his own as full-time inventor and manufac

turer. The grand goal was nothing other than enjoying the autonomy of
entrepreneur and forestalling a return to the servitude of employee.

Edison's need for autonomy was primal and unvarying; it would de
termine the course of his career from beginning to end. Having no fi
nancial assets of his own, he was dependent upon partners who were
willing to contribute capital. He had the good fortune to live within the
American business ecosystem that valued technical talent and permitted
him to attain equal-partner status with wealthy financiers solely on the
basis of his wits. For a few restless years, until he would have the where

withal to shake free of partners, at least active ones who impinged upon
his day-to-day activities, Edison hopped from one business venture and
short-lived partnership to another, moving from Boston to New York
City, then to a succession of cities in New Jersey, ending up in Newark.

Sometimes, the partners remained anonymous (Newark Telegraph
Works; American Telegraph Works; News Reporting Telegraph Com
pany; Domestic Telegraph Company). Other times, Edison shared the
marquee. The order of names suggests that Edison's importance was pro
gressively recognized, as he moved from the back (Pope, Edison & Com
pany) to the front (Edison and Unger; Edison and Murray). But it would

13



14 / 

be wrong to infer a hunger on his part for wide public recognition. Edi
son's reputation grew within the insular circle of telegraph equipment
customers, but neither they nor he thought anyone who dwelled within
this tiny world would be a subject of interest to a wider one.

All of Edison's first ventures were dependent upon securing contracts
that funded product development and procured small lots of completed
telegraph instruments. Financial prospects for Edison's partnerships
brightened and darkened and brightened again month to month,
wholly typical of small firms with a highly specialized product and re
stricted customer base. On the eve of founding the American Telegraph
Works in 1870, Edison wrote his parents in Port Huron in ebullient

spirits. He reported that his shop had 18 employees and a new shop
that he was starting (no mention of his partner) would employ 150. He
joked he had become a "Bloated Eastern Manufacturer." The next year,
however, meeting the weekly payroll of $578 was so difficult that Edi
son wrote one of his backers in a foul state of mind, hinting that he was
on the verge of being "completely broken down in health & mind." He
underlined the following for emphasis: "You Cannot expect a man to
invent & work night and day, and then be worried to a point of exas
peration about how to obtain money to pay bills."

Notwithstanding such occasional moments of terror-and the fact
that his hair turned white, which he attributed to stress-Edison was

succeeding, building several businesses whose balance sheets reflected
modest, but real, gains. When he and partner William Unger took stock
of their shop at the beginning of 1872, three years after Edison decided
to try his luck as an entrepreneur, his half share in the business was val

ued at about $11,438. When R. G. Dun & Company prepared a credit
report about the firm, whose business was categorized as "Telegraph
Fixtures," Unger was the principal who handled the finances and Edi
son was "an ingenious Mechanic & inventor." Not enough was known
about the firm to warrant a positive credit recommendation, but the
available evidence suggested to the outside investigators that the firm's
"transactions indicate a large business."



 \ 15

The News Reporting Telegraph Company, another Edison coventure
with Unger, was brilliant in its conception, but 1871 may have been
about a hundred years ahead of the most propitious time for launch.
The company was conceived with the same insight that would give
birth to Bloomberg News: businesspeople, unlike general readers, are
able to convert news into immediate financial gain for themselves, and
for that reason can be persuaded to pay for access to a news pipeline
dedicated to their interests. The News Reporting Telegraph Company
offered subscribers a private telegraph line and alphabetic printer that
delivered news "hours before such news is published in the papers."

When twenty-four-year-old Edison and his partner opened for busi
ness in the fall of 1871, they hired sixteen-year-old Mary Stilwell, the
daughter of a lawyer and sometime inventor, as one of several female
employees. The surviving records do not make clear whether the com
pany ever secured even a single client, but before it closed, Miss Stillwell
and her employer had an encounter that was described in a biographi
cal sketch, Edison and His Inventions., published a few years later.

Among the young women whom he employed to manipulate
these machines, with a view to testing their capacity for speed,
was a rather demure young person who attended to her work

and never raised her eyes to the incipient genius. One day Edi
son stood observing her as she drove down one key after an
other with her plump fingers, until, growing nervous under his
prolonged stare, she dropped her hands idly in her lap, and
looked up helplessly into his face. A genial smile overspread
Edison's face, and he presently inquired rather abruptly:

"What do you think of me, little girl? Do you like me?"
"Why, Mr. Edison, you frighten me. I-that is-I--
"Don't be in any hurry about telling me. It doesn't matter

much, unless you would like to marry me."
The young woman was disposed to laugh, but Edison went on:

"Oh, I mean it. Don't be in a rush, though. Think it over; talk to



16 / 

your mother about it, and let me know soon as convenient

Tuesday say. How will Tuesday suit you, next week Tuesday,
I mean?"

The language may strike modern ears as sinister-What do you think
ofme, little girl?-but its veracity is bolstered by a strikingly similar ac
count in the Christian Herald & Signs of Our Times. Even the author of
the chronicle in the Christian Herald felt compelled to comment on Edi
son's "off-hand business-like" manner of courtship.

Another story was told of how a telegrapher friend happened by Edi
son's laboratory late one night and upon seeing a light on, climbed the
stairs and found his friend half-dozing at his desk.

"Halloo Tom?" cried the visitor cheerily, "what are you doing
here this late? Aren't you going home?"

"What time is it?" inquired Edison, sleepily rubbing his eyes
and stretching like a lion suddenly aroused.

"Midnight easy enough. Come along."
"Is that so?" returned Edison in a dreamy sort of a way. "By

George. I must go home, then. I was married to day."

After the wedding and a weeklong honeymoon in Boston in December
1871, the newlyweds moved into a new home in Newark, which Edison
outfitted with servants and $2,000 worth of furnishings, including a
piano. The domestic sphere became the new Mrs. Edison's bailiwick.
According to one source, she "did not appreciate a genius for a hus
band" and attempted to make Edison into a well-dressed, sociable com
panion. The couple's first child, Marion, born in 1873 (Edison gave
her the telegraphic nickname of "Dot") recalled a less critical, but not
incompatible, impression. She remembered her mother giving parties
that her father never attended, but supposedly was never pressed to
da so.

When Edison was married, he was financially comfortable, able not
only to purchase his first house but also sufficiently flush to make in-



 \ 17

vestments in his father's and older brother's businesses in Port Huron at

the same time he had stakes in five separate shops scattered around
Newark. Edison's own businesses were dependent, however, on client
firms in the telegraph business, whose fortunes were in turn dependent
upon Wall Street firms. When the Panic of 1873 hit, the financial sector
was hit hard, and so, too, were the businesses that served it. By 1874,
Edison was in serious financial straits and had to sell his house at a loss

and move his family into an apartment.
Edison did not close his laboratory, however. He could still grapple

with the big problem of his professional field: how to push more mes
sages simultaneously down a single telegraph line. The modern history
of communications can be divided into two separate epochs: In the first,
the race was to find a means to beat the speed of a horse, and this teleg
raphy achieved (technically speaking, this came even before telegraphy
was electrified: "visual" telegraphy using manned signal towers were
built in the 1790s in France). As Marshall McLuhan observed, the
telegram was the first message to outrun the messenger. In the second
epoch, from the time of early telegraphy to the present-day Internet, the
race has involved sending as many messages as possible from point A to
point B down a single conduit.

In the first decades of telegraphy, the very idea that more than one
message could be sent at a time was incomprehensible to most. Edison
had already devised a way to send two messages simultaneously in op
posite directions-what would be called duplex telegraphy-but he
was both too late (someone else had nabbed the first patent and placed
the first working system in the field) and too early (a supervisor had lost
patience with Edison and fired him because "any damned fool ought to
know that a wire can't be worked both ways at the same time"). Edison
set to work on a quadruplex system-two messages sent simultane
ously from one direction, and two more from the other. Succeeding, a
feat involving complex electromechanical devices, he solidified his repu
tation in the field of telegraph equipment and pushed the limits of that
particular line of multiplexing technology about as far as possible. (He
later tried, but failed, to design a similar sextuplex system.)



18 / 

Edison only had experience selling telegraph equipment, batteries,
supplies, and related equipment in the business-to-business trade. A
mass market for consumer goods, with the potential of far greater sales,
also existed, if he could only come up with a suitable product. In May
1874, he and his partner, Joseph Murray, introduced the Inductorium,
battery-powered induction coils for inducing electric shocks. Advertise
ments claimed that the device "should be in every family as a specific
cure for rheumatism, and as an inexhaustible fount of amusement." It
sold well enough that the price was raised 33 percent after its introduc
tion and it would eventually be advertised in more than three hundred
newspapers. It was sufficiently successful to provide its inventor with
the feeling that marketing to the masses was not particularly difficult.
Invent it, and they will come.

Edison had not started out with grand ambition, but his appetite for
business success was whetted. The quadruplex seemed destined for
great success, though who would reap the profits would be complicated
by protracted legal disputes that bogged down in the courts and would
spill into Congress. The quadruplex greatly increased the carrying ca
pacity of the existing telegraph network, but it did not change the labor
intensive process of translating a message into Morse code, then tapping,
receiving, and retranslating back into ordinary language. A system to
automate telegraphy would provide a fundamental advance, and this,
too, Edison worked on.

The equipment that he invented to create an end-to-end system of tele

graphic automation used a keyboard similar to that of a typewriter that
composed messages on a long strip of paper, making small and large
perforations that corresponded to Morse code. Once complete, the tape
would be run across a drum that could send as many as a thousand

words a minute. At the receiving end, a roll of chemically treated paper
was drawn beneath a row of four styluses, each of which could be
turned on and off rapidly dozens of times a second, forming roman let
ters that anticipated the dot-matrix computer printer of the twentieth
century. The system did involve an extra step of preparing the perfo
rated tape and was best suited for long messages such as news stories



 \ 19

that had to be sent to many different locations. But Edison's automatic

telegraphy not only dramatically increased the carrying capacity of the
telegraph network, it also eliminated the need for skilled operators.
Daniel Craig, a financial backer of Edison's, wrote him, "You captivate
my whole heart when you speak of making machines which will require
'No Intelligence.' That's the thing for Telegraphers."

The next month, Craig wrote him, "If you should tell me you could
make babies by machinery, I shouldn't doubt it." Automated baby pro
duction, however, was not on Edison's list of prospective projects in
1875 when he broke off from Murray. Edison wanted to leave manu

facturing and pursue invention full-time-and without the encum
brance of a partner. He did not move far, establishing a laboratory for
invention on a different floor in the same building in Newark.

Using his experience developing the machinery to perforate the paper
tapes used for transmitting messages automatically, he came up with a
handheld, battery-powered electric pen. This was Edison's first signifi
cant venture outside of the telegraphic field and would be the direct an
tecedent to the mimeograph machine: The pen had a sharp needle that
moved up and down rapidly, creating a stencil master that could be
used to run off hundreds of copies. Edison was sanguine about its com
mercial prospects. "There is more money in this than telegraphy," he
wrote a colleague in September 1875.

Edison was content, however, to set up a separate company to handle
the manufacturing and sales and other prosaic annoyances. It is likely
that he, like his chief assistant, Charles Batchelor, envisaged no ongoing
role other than receiving royalty checks. Batchelor, a British-born immi
grant one year older than Edison, had come to the United States origi
nally as a textile mechanic but had quickly acquired expertise in
electrical engineering, too. He was smart, tireless, and modest to a fault
in his personal ambitions. "We have now got the 'Electric Pen' fairly out
on Royalty," Batchelor wrote his father in England, "and in a very short
time I shall have nothing whatever to do for it except receive my share
of Royalty." He also reminded his father that the last letter he had re
ceived had been misaddressed to Newark; Batchelor, Edison, and their



20 / 

families, along with Edison's laboratory and its staff, had recently
moved to a new location, Menlo Park, New Jersey.

The casual mention did not highlight the significance of this move,
quite different from the many moves that had preceded it. This time,
Edison moved out on his own, without a partner in tow, and settled in a

place so empty of dwellings that it resembled open frontier (Batchelor
reported that the "good shooting" available had to be balanced with
the snake infestations). The move was made possible by the patronage
of Jay Gould and his Atlantic and Pacific Telegraph Company, which
was keenly interested in Edison's ongoing work on automatic telegra
phy. Consulting contracts and purchase orders had brought prosperous
times again to the Edison household. In January 1875, Gould paid Edi
son $13,500, and Western Union delivered $5,000, and it seemed as if
the family would never have money problems again. Bills were paid off,
relatives received cash gifts and loans for business ventures, and Mary
Edison felt free to shop and entertain without worries. Edison had gone
shopping himself, for a new site for a laboratory, and had settled on
land in Menlo Park, about thirty miles from New York. He spent about
$2,700 to build a new laboratory structure, and in the spring of 1876
moved into a nearby house with his family, which was newly expanded
with the arrival of a second child, Thomas Alva Edison Jr. (nicknamed
"Dash" to match three-year-old "Dot").

A short train ride out from New York City, but half a world distant,
Menlo Park was the site where a real estate developer's ambitions had
ended in bankruptcy. It consisted of about thirty large homes spread out
on large lots, connected by a boardwalk and dirt roads. No town hall,
school, or church. One saloon.

William Preece, a telegraph engineer for the British Post Office, hap
pened to pay a visit to Edison's new Menlo Park laboratory in May
1877 when the rest of the world knew nothing about Edison's existence,
nor Menlo Park's. The town was too small to merit its own identifying
sign at the train stop, and Preece almost missed it, hurriedly hopping off
the train after it was in motion again. When he did so, he found himself



\21

at a desolate station in rural New Jersey. It was a blazing hot day and no
porters were on hand.

Preece provides a unique account of one not-famous Englishman
paying a call on a not-yet-famous American and fellow telegraphy ex
pert. Before taking the train to Menlo Park, Preece had been most enter
tained in New York City by the nineteenth-century version of The Fast
and the Furious, illegal street racing with lightly harnessed horses,
roads lined with spectators, and frequent "collisions and rows" that
brought unwanted attention from the police. In the little residential de
velopment of Menlo Park, however, such excitements were nowhere in
evidence. Built up too recently to have the benefit of protective shade
trees, the houses sat exposed to sunlight.

Starting from the Menlo Park station, Preece passed a substantial
three-storied frame house, wide and shallow with cross-gables, that sat
next to the tracks-this had been the sales office for the development
and now was the Edison family's house-and climbed up to the top of a
hill, which offered a prospect from which one could glimpse the spire of
Trinity Church in New York City. On the hilltop sat a long, two-storied
plain white building variously described as "an elongated schoolhouse"
or a "country shoe factory." This was Edison's laboratory. On the out
side, the bucolic setting was not wholly intact. At the rear of the build
ing was an old apple tree, around which were arranged discarded barrels,
wheels, and machinery. The second story drew in twelve telegraph lines
that came up from the station. This was not incidental; discovering im
provements in telegraphy was the laboratory's raison d'tre and the pri
mary interest of Preece.

The first floor of the laboratory was divided into a reception room, an
office, a library, a machine shop, and a storehouse; the upper floor com
prised one long room, filled with workbenches and machines, and lined
with glass cases holding chemicals and sundry materials. A "spider web"
of telegraph wires covered the ceiling of the laboratory's main room,
converging on a large battery placed in the center of the room. The twelve
or so workers on hand were directed by a disheveled figure of medium



22 / 

height. He had grimy hands, wore a collarless shirt and a seedy black
jacket, and his hair was uncombed. Most striking were eyes that im
pressed visitors as penetrating, and later inspired flights of poetical de
scription by hagiographers ("the fire of genius shone in his dark deep gray
eyes"). The man was only thirty years old, but he carried an aura of
authority and a tendency toward curtness that suggested advanced years.
Thomas Alva Edison was already "the Old Man" to his employees.

The Menlo Park lab had not yet attracted the attention of the general
press, so Preece's visit went unremarked. Nor did Edison record his im

pressions. The only notes are in Preece's diary, which is full of praise for
Edison, whom Preece described as an "ingenious electrician." He goes
on at great length about the train's whistles ("the most horrid howls
more like an elephant's trumpet than anything else") but has nothing in
particular to say about the apparatus upon which Edison was working.
What is most remarkable is how unremarkable Preece found the inven

tive activity there.
The isolation of the Menlo Park setting infused the laboratory with a

feeling of unbounded creative freedom. It encouraged an outlook that
saw far, which also meant that little interest could be mustered for fix

ing problems with older products like the electric pen. Royalty checks
for the pen were not adding up as Edison had expected because it had
been sent into the field without anyone at the laboratory noticing that it
was rather difficult to hold and use. It was likened by one unhappy cus
tomer to holding" 'the business end' of a wasp on a sheet of paper and
letting the insect sting holes into the sheet while you move him back and
forth." A sales manager reporting to Edison tried to strike an impos
sible balance of optimism and realism: "The thing is highly praised
everywhere but it will be harder to sell than you anticipate." The fault,
Edison was told by another manager, was with the customers' "preju
dice and stupidity." (The pen would enjoy a second life years later, in
the 1890s, when converted into the first electric tattoo needle.)

Despite the ideal conditions, big ideas did not materialize in Menlo
Park. Instead, odds and ends were turned out and marketed by another
company that Edison established for this purpose, the American Nov-



\23

elty Company. It sold duplicating ink, an electric drill, an electric en
graving machine for jewelers, an electric sheep-shearing machine, and
other oddments. At least it could be said that these used the laboratory's
expertise in electrical engineering, even if they comprised an incoherent
line of offerings. Still other curiosities were added to the mix, such as
Batchelor's "Office Door Attachment," an exceedingly low-tech sign to
show the occupant's presence or, if absent, time of return. An idea for a

"Flying Bird," capable of flying to an altitude of a thousand feet or
higher, and to be used as either "a pleasing Scientific Toy" or perhaps
for "carrying communications short distance," was scribbled in a note

book, but never was worked up into a prototype. Having tried all sorts
of products, and focusing on no single one, the American Novelty Com
pany failed about eight months after it was incorporated.

Telegraphy trumped toys. Great sums of money would go to the in
ventor that solved the telegraph industry's most pressing need: finding
ways to pack more messages into a telegraph line. Acoustic telegraphy,
also called harmonic telegraphy, opened up a new way to send more
than one message at a time. This approach took advantage of the fact
that a tuning fork will respond to the vibrations of another fork with
identical characteristics and ignore others. By utilizing in a telegraph
network many pairs of vibrating reeds that acted like tuning forks
one of each pair placed at the sending station, the other at the receiving
station-each set could be operated as a separate channel of communi
cation, unaffected by the others.

It was while Alexander Graham Bell and his assistant were experi
menting with acoustic telegraphy that Bell accidentally, and famously,
discovered that the instruments could convey any form of sound. The

precise moment of discovery, in June 1875, did not involve speech in
crystalline form. Bell, with ear pressed against a vibrating reed, could
hear the faint blurry sound of Thomas Watson's voice, but could not
make out any words. This was sufficient to provide Bell with the insight
that led to the telephone. (The more famous rendering-"Mr. Watson,
come here, I want to see you" -came almost a year later, after Bell had
filed the patent for the telephone and built a working model.)



24 / 

Young Bell and Edison were the same age, each improving the major
invention that the other had come up with first, Edison following Bell,
then Bell following Edison. Edison, in fact, had been close to devising a
working telephone himself. After Bell's success, the next best thing for
Edison was to come up with an indispensable improvement, the carbon
transmitter that captured the human voice far better than Bell's magnetic
design. Edison also devised an entirely new kind of receiver based on his
electromotograph, which involved a chalk cylinder, chemicals, friction
controlled by varying current, and a hand crank; it would never prove to
be a practical design for the ordinary speaking telephone, but it could re
produce music clearly and at an astounding volume. Initially, Bell and
Edison were direct competitors in the brand-new telephone business,
playing upon the public's interest in musical performance to show off
their wares by holding telephone "concerts" in exhibition halls.

Bell lacked the gifts of the born showman, however. In May 1877, he
offered a concert-lecture to an audience of three hundred who had gath
ered at Chickering Hall in New York City for an evening heavy on lec
ture, light on concert. The New York Times described Bell's presentation
on "Sound and Electricity" to be "exhaustive"; the lecturer's supplemen
tal visual aids were panned as "complex and not very intelligible." At
last, the audience was treated to what we may guess they had been wait
ing for most eagerly, the novelty of hearing recognizable organ music,
piped via telegraph connection, from a location miles away.

Edison was no showman, either, and, being partially deaf, hated
speaking before a group. He could rely, however, upon an energetic pro
moter as his proxy: Edward Johnson, a former telegrapher himself (and
former sales agent for the Inductorium). Johnson was technically knowl
edgeable, had his own ideas for invention, and possessed a gift for ex
tolling the virtues of whatever was his preoccupation of the moment.
(Johnson's excitability, on occasion, led to misplaced enthusiasm, such
as his eagerness in April 1876 to persuade Edison to lend his name to
Johnson's invention of an improved tobacco pipe that Johnson hoped to
market as "Edison's Perpetual Segar.")

Edison, Batchelor, and Johnson oversaw preparations to launch their



 \ 25

own concert tour of the musical telephone. About the time of Bell's
concert-lecture in New York City, Edison and his assistants were still

working out the kinks while giving concerts in nearby Newark. Edison
had yet to show the public a telephone that conveyed human conversa
tion in addition to music, but he had local boosters. The Woodbridge
Independent confided, "We should not be at all surprised if Edison
taught this child of his inventive fancy to talk." "Mr. Edison has been so
often scoffed at," the Newark Daily Advertiser observed, "that it has
no other effect upon him than to stimulate him to increased study and
labor." In what readers of 1877 were expected to regard as a humorous
touch, the reporter concluded that were Edison to succeed in devising a
telephone for speaking, "what an instrument of torture it would be in
the hands and at the mouth of a distant and irate mother-in-law."

The big-city debut of Edison's musical telephone was arranged for
Philadelphia in mid-July 1877. A three-way contest was under way.
Alexander Graham Bell's musical telephone had been eclipsed by the re
cent debut of a competing musical telephone developed by rival inven
tor Elisha Gray. Would Edison's, in turn, best Gray's? The competition
was as keenly followed as a sports rivalry. The New York Times did not
even wait for the formal debut of Edison's telephone; the paper dis
patched a reporter to the public rehearsal held the day before.

The early Times's verdict: awful. Compared to Gray's, Edison's tele
phone was not nearly as loud, its notes not as "sweet." It might work
well as a practical instrument in sending telegraphic messages, the
paper reported, but as a device producing sounds intended to please the
human ear, it lagged the competition.

When Johnson saw the review, he was in Philadelphia overseeing
preparations for the performance. He wrote Edison that "the N.Y. times
[sic] man is a fool," but he was happy that the rehearsal had come off,
period. His Edison telephone was behaving erratically, and he begged
Edison to send him a new, more dependable one from the laboratory.
He also had to payoff the newspapers, which had their hands out. The
New York Daily Graphic explained that it was "customary" for subjects
to order extra copies in order to indirectly reimburse the newspaper for



26 / 

the additional expense of providing engraved illustrations that would
accompany the upcoming story. For the "Puff," Johnson agreed to take
one hundred copies and asked Edison to sign up for a similar amount.

On the day of the concert, Edison responded at last to Johnson's pleas,
and placed a new telephone on the 8:00 A.M. train bound for Philadel
phia. Alas, when Johnson arrived at the Pennsylvania Railroad depot to
pick up the package, it could not be found. It turned out to be in the
hands of an express company and would not appear until too late that

evening. In the end, Johnson had to use the defective equipment that
had been used in the rehearsal.

The demo gods gave their blessing to the event, however, and now
the Times was impressed in every aspect. The volume was excellent, the
sound being easily heard by the crowd of 3,500 (Johnson, fond of exag
geration, boasted to Edison that the crowd was even bigger, six thou
sand people). The songs were deemed "musically enjoyable" and one
even was "encored," though the performers were five miles away.

Johnson knew that "by the turn of a hair" the performance "might
have been the most ridiculous farce ever heard of," yet the narrow aver
sion of disaster did not slow down his calculations of future profits to
be earned charging admission to similar exhibitions. Johnson was as
sanguine as any businessperson in the new telephone business about the
commercial potential in using telephones to deliver music, but even he
could not keep up with the general public. Let the credit for the most
farsighted vision of that moment go to one Joseph Hipple, of Spruce
Mills, Iowa, who in March 1877 had a fully developed scheme for pip
ing music directly to the home rather than to exhibition halls. Hipple
proposed that relay teams of musicians could perform at one central lo
cation during the late afternoon and evening hours, providing music on
tap, "the same as water and gas." (Hipple's idea of music-on-demand
was beautiful in conception but advanced no further than Hipple's ex
position in a letter to the editor of the New York Daily Graphic.)

At that moment, when Edison's telephone was better suited for con
veying music than the human voice, when the music-loving public was
willing to traipse to a concert in which the players were not physically



\27

present and was willing to pay for the privilege (at least until the novelty
wore off), when it was possible to imagine individual households paying
for satellite-radio version 0.1, pre satellites, Edison was in the perfect
position to realize the business potential in music. But he did not; teleg
raphy remained his principal interest. Around the time of the telephone
concerts, he redoubled his efforts to complete a complicated contrap
tion of thirty wheels that would convert taps on an alphabetic keyboard
into unique vibrations for acoustic telegraphy. He did have a vision of
delivering signals directly to households, but it involved sending the
human voice, not music. By attaching telephones to gas pipes that were
already in place in the home, Edison thought it should be possible to use
the gas, instead of electricity, as a medium for conveying sound waves.

The musical telephone offered the opportunity to enjoy live music
without being immediately present. The constrictions of geography
were loosening, but not those of time: one could listen to performances
only synchronously, that is, at the same time the players performed. In
retrospect, one can see the need for an invention that permitted the en
joyment of music asynchronously, at a time of the listener's own choos
ing. Edison came up with the first gadget that would eventually fill this
need. The process that produced the invention could not be called care
ful planning, but it was something more than pure serendipity. It was
the by-product of working on state-of-the-art communications technol
ogy, while remaining receptive to chance insight and recombining bits
of recently secured experience. Bell invented the telephone while tinker
ing with acoustic telegraphy; Edison invented the phonograph while
tinkering with the telephone.

Initially, telephones were regarded as instruments to be used only by
telegraph company employees. Instead of sending messages in Morse
code, the operator would transmit the message verbally, but if the mes
sage had to be transcribed manually at the receiving end by a human
operator, the capacity of the system to carry a given quantity of mes

sages would be dramatically constricted. Some way needed to be devised
to record the message mechanically-the practicality of the telephone
appeared to hang in the balance.



28 / 

The very variety of Edison's previous inventions served him well for

tackling the problem of recording. His automatic telegraph used a stylus
that rested on a strip of paper that ran continuously beneath it-that
paper would be part of Edison's solution. For another project, making
electrical condensers, Edison's laboratory staff had learned how to
apply a wax coating to paper, and Edison had tried to peddle it as a
sideline to food producers, with no apparent success (the New York
Paper Barrel Company explained that the paper "must be Sweet & Pure
free from oder [sic]," a tough requirement for Edison's grimy labora
tory to meet). A legacy of this work in the laboratory was a cupboard
well stocked with coated and uncoated paper, cut to various sizes.

A sketch and brief caption in a notebook entry dated 17 July 1877
recorded an idea for putting the paper to use on the telephone problem:
Edison and his assistants sketched in bare outline a system that the tele

graph company could use to record spoken messages. How exactly the
recording would be accomplished was treated as incidental-the paper
could be embossed, or perforated with needles, or inked using the elec
tromotograph. The principal point was to enable the company to send
the recording for playback and transcription by low-paid copyists, who
could work at the rate of twenty-five words a minute, rather than have
highly skilled-and highly paid-operators try to record the message in
real time at one hundred words a minute as it arrived.

Another project under way was the laboratory's ongoing work on
improving the quality of the telephone transmitter. Under Edison's di
rection, the laboratory was in the midst of testing different materials as
experimental diaphragms that would vibrate when receiving sound
waves. A partial list of candidates: glass, mica, hard rubber, celluloid,
aluminum foil, parchment, pith, leather, chamois, cloth, silk, gelatin,
ivory, birch bark, rawhide, pig's bladder, fish guts, and a $5 bill. To

each, a mouthpiece was attached and then mounted in a frame for con
venient handling. By holding the frame up and speaking in a loud voice
while holding a finger on the rear of the diaphragm, one could detect
the vibrations, all without the trouble of attaching it to a working tele
phone and applying electrical current.



\29

No less important than the technical antecedents was the setting, this
after-hours laboratory. When Edison was working long hours, which
on occasion meant all-night work sessions, his assistants were expected
to do the same. Early on, Edison established a tradition of providing a
midnight dinner in the lab, brought up by the night watchman. The
feast was accompanied by a convivial conversation that was the only
time of the workday that Edison would allow himself to relax. An em
ployee described the typical pattern: "Hilarity came with the filling of
stomachs, bantering and story telling were interlarded, until Edison
arose, stretched, took a hitch at his waistband in sailor fashion and

began to saunter away-the signal that dinner was over, and it was time
to begin work again."

The day after Edison had noted the idea for recording voice messages
received by a telegraphy office, he came up with a variation. That
evening, on 18 July 1877, when the midnight dinner had been con
sumed but the men had not yet dispersed to return to the work of com
paring different types of diaphragms for the telephone, Edison
entertained himself speaking into one, while pressing his finger on the
rear surface, feeling the vibrations. After a while, he turned around to
face Batchelor and casually remarked, "Batch, if we had a point on this
we could make a record on some material which we could afterwards

pull under the point, and it would give us the speech back."
As soon as Edison had pointed it out, it seemed so obvious that they

did not pause to appreciate what Batchelor would later describe as the

"brilliancy" of the suggestion. Everyone jumped up to rig a test. John
Kruesi, the laboratory's chief machinist, took command of soldering a
needle to the middle of a diaphragm; he then attached the diaphragm to
a stand holding one of the wheels used in the automatic telegraph.
Batchelor cut some strips of wax paper, and within an hour, they had
the gizmo set up on the table, paper inserted on top of the wheel, and
the needle adjusted so that it pressed lightly on the paper. Edison sat
down, leaned into the mouthpiece, and while Batchelor pulled the
paper through, he delivered the stock phrase the lab used to test tele
phone diaphragms: "Mary had a little lamb."



30 / 

When they took a look, the paper strip, as expected, had irregular
marks. Batchelor reinserted the beginning of the strip across the top of
the wheel and beneath the needle, then pulled, trying to maintain the
same speed as the first time. Out came "ary ad ell am." "It was not fine
talking," Batchelor recalled, "but the shape of it was there." The men
celebrated with a whoop, shook hands with one another, and worked
on. By breakfast the following morning, they had succeeded in getting
clear articulation from waxed paper, the first recording medium-in the
first midnight recording session.

The all-nighter at the laboratory must have been a routine occurrence,
for the discovery was treated surprisingly casually in the lab's notebooks.
The entries for 18 July 1877 were extensive but focused on the tele
phone; only at the bottom of one page was the following brief entry:

Just tried experiment with a diaphragm [sic] having an emboss
ing point & held against parafin [sic] paper moving rapidly the
spkg vibrations are indented nicely & theres [sic] no doubt that
I shall be able to store up & reproduce automatically at any
future time the human voice perfectly

Though Edison used the first-person voice, Batchelor and James Adams,
another assistant, signed their names to the page, too.

It was a singular moment in the modern history of invention, but, in
the years that would follow, Edison would never tell the story the way it

actually unfolded that summer, always moving the events from July
1877 to December. We may guess the reason why: in July, he and his as
sistants failed to appreciate what they had discovered. At the time, they
were working feverishly to develop a set of working telephones to show
to their best prospect, William Orton, president of Western Union, and
Batchelor's diary shows entry after entry that July in which he dryly
recorded varied phrasings of a single routine: "worked all day and night
on Speaker telegraph." We can assume that Batchelor's assignments
were tightly coupled with Edison's own experimental agenda of the mo
ment, and the task that occupied the entire staff was to improve the tele-



\31

phone's ability to handle human speech rather than music. There was
no time to pause and reflect on the incidental invention of what was the

first working model of the phonograph.
Other potential distractions were shut out, too, such as suggestions

from professional acquaintances to strike out in a wholly new direction.
On the very day that the laboratory noted its breakthrough in recording
sound, George Field, an early investor in Edison's telegraphy work,
wrote him with a suggestion to take notice of the recent demonstration
of electric streetlights in Paris. "I feel quite confident," Field said, "that
if you will apply yourself to it that important results might follow." Edi
son was unwilling to change course-or even to give the phonograph
sustained attention.

The first, brief public mention of the crude phonograph came in mid
August 1877, a month after the midnight birth (even then it still lacked
a name). Edward Johnson told the Philadelphia Record that Edison had
invented an instrument "by which a speech can be recorded while it is
being delivered on prepared paper" and the same paper could "rede
liver" it at any time. Edison and Batchelor, focused as they were at the
time on improving the telephone for speech, naturally thought that
their device would be used for speech, ignoring music. But curiously,
even Johnson, the impresario in charge of exhibiting Edison's musical
telephone, failed to consider the possibilities for recording music, too.

It took a long while for Edison to decide what to call the contraption.
By this time, "phonograph" had been jotted onto a laboratory note
book, but the word was in common usage at the time as a synonym for
"shorthand." The invention continued to be labeled in the notebooks

with the broader rubric"speaking telegraph," reflecting the assumption
that it would be put to use in the telegraph office, recording messages.
An unidentified staff member drew up a list of possible names for the
machine, which included:

Tel-autograph
Tel-autophone
Polyphone = manifold sounder



32 / 

Autophone = Self-sounder
Cosmophone = Universal sounder
Acoustophone = Audible speaker
Otophone = Ear-sounder = speaker
Antiphone = Back-talker
Liquphone = Clear speaker
Chronophone = Time-announcer = Speaking clock
Didaskophone = Teaching speaker = Portable teacher
Glottophone = Language sounder or speaker
Climatophone = Weather announcer
Klangophone = Bird-cry sounder
Hulagmophone = Barking sounder
Omphlegraph = voice writer
Epograph = speech writer
aerophone = air sound
phonomime
Ecophone

As he and his staff made progress on the telephone's speech capabili
ties, Edison kept Western Union's Orton briefed on the good news. The
sensitivity of Edison's carbon microphone permitted the speaker to
stand ten feet away from the speaking tube, he wrote excitedly, after an
other long night of experimenting. In September, Edison's telephones
were placed in competition against Bell's in Orton's presence, and Edi
son won an immediate order for 150 sets. Edison wrote a colleague of
Orton's surprise: "He had no idea that he could get it so loud."

The expense of maintaining the laboratory was considerable, the
money Edison had received in 1875 was spent, and the initial order for

telephones from Western Union did not immediately ease the cash
shortage. In October 1877, he wrote his father that he was "at present
very hard up for cash," but if his "speaking telegraph" was successful,
he would receive an advance on royalties. The commercial potential of
his still-unnamed recording apparatus remained out of sight. Edison
seems to have been disappointed when he told Benjamin Butler, an at-



\33

torney who had represented him in the past, that he had not yet
achieved the goal he had mentioned to Butler: developing the ability to
"print" the human voice on paper using a particular mark for a given
sound, without prior recording, as one typesets a romanized alphabet.

Edison said that he could at least capture the human voice on paper

by recording speech and then play it back "at any future time." Butler
thought this so remarkable that "I do not understand it at all." How
ever it worked, he told Edison, there was no need to go further in his ex

perimental work (advice that ratified the Menlo Park crew's view that
the human voice was the ultimate prize in recording sound). He sensed,
correctly, that Edison did not appreciate the significance of his own dis
covery. "I need not say that you had better keep it perfectly secret," But
ler advised.

A secret it remained, effectively, as the mention the previous month in
the Philadelphia Record had been missed by other newspapers. But
only two weeks later, Edward Johnson could not remain quiet, not
when French rivals were getting attention for similar work. He was in
furiated by an article in Scientific American describing C. L. Rosapelly
and Etienne-Jules Marey's work on instruments for graphically-and
cumbersomely-recording speech by simultaneously registering the
movement of thorax, larynx, lips, tongue, and palate. Once recorded,
those lines would somehow have to be translated into audible speech. If
Scientific American's respectful treatment of this path to failure was not
exasperating enough to Johnson, the magazine had also voiced the pre
diction that it would lead someday to the recording of speech that could
be transmitted electrically by wire. With Edison's permission, Johnson
wrote to the editor of Scientific American to say there was no need to
wait for the French to perfect their technique for capturing speech on
paper-Mr. Edison had already achieved everything the French hoped
for, and could use paper to reproduce speech long distances, too.

An engraved illustration accompanied Johnson's long letter, showing
a strip of paper that ran along the top of two rollers, with a recording
stylus and telephone mouthpiece suspended over one, and a playback
stylus and a reproducer that looked from the outside just like the



34 / 

mouthpiece suspended over the other roller. A "boss," or protuberant
line, ran the length of the paper, so the stylus, which rested on top,
could easily make an indentation in response to the amplitude of the
sound. The invention still lacked a name and was referred to as "the

apparatus.
"

The editors of Scientific American were so excited-so emotionally
moved, they confessed in an introduction, by the immediate prospect of
being able to listen to the voices of the dead-that they jumped ahead to
a list of possible applications of this new capability. Spoken messages
might replace written letters. The words of history's greatest orators
could be enjoyed in perpetuity. And "music may be crystallized as well."

The publication of Johnson's letter in Scientific American in early
November set off a frenzy in America and Europe. The New York Sun
was fascinated by the metaphysical implications of an invention that
could play "Echoes from Dead Voices." The New York Times predicted
that a large business would develop in "bottled sermons," and wealthy
connoisseurs would take pride in keeping "a well-stocked oratorical
cellar." To the English Mechanic, still absorbing the capability of the
telephone, it appeared that Edison's new invention was "more remark
able still," for it could convey the human voice at any time, even "a
hundred years hence." Such was the authority of Scientific American's
imprimatur that all of this extraordinary attention was lavished not on
the first working phonograph made available for public inspection, but
merely on a description supplied by Edison's assistant.

No machine was ready for public inspection because just before
Johnson wrote his letter describing how a paper strip served as the
recording medium, Edison had shifted his experimental focus from
paper to tinfoil. Instead of using a raised ridge embossed on paper as a
soft surface that was easily impressed by the recording needle, Edison
now conceptualized a one-foot-long cylinder, whose surface had been
threaded, and upon which a sheet of tinfoil would be placed. By posi
tioning the recording needle on the top of the cylinder at the beginning
of the thread, it rested on a continuous groove below the foil's surface,
easily impressing the foil just like the embossed ridge of the paper.



\35

When setting down on 5 November 1877 the outlines of his design,
Edison still conceptualized the device as a medium for speech. He esti
mated that a single sheet could hold about two hundred spoken words.
But the next day, Johnson's letter to Scientific American appeared, and
from that moment on, Edison no longer worked in obscurity. The per
manence of this change was something that he, like anyone else, could
not have appreciated at the time. But one immediate benefit of the
press's marveling was that the extensive coverage supplied Edison with
creative ideas about how the phonograph could be adapted for many
more uses than telegraphy or senatorial speeches.

Years before, Edison had begun to systematically record all Iabora
tory findings and the progress of his own thinking about the projects.
His jottings in this period reflect the influence of speculations of
strangers. By late November, Edison and his staff had caught on to the
phonograph's commercial potential as a gadget for entertainment. On a
page signed by Edison, Batchelor, Adams, and Kruesi, a list of possible
uses for the phonograph was noted, assembled apparently by free asso
ciation: speaking toys (dogs, reptiles, humans); whistling toy train en
gines; music boxes; clocks and watches that announced the time. There
was even an inkling of the future importance of personal music collec
tions, here described as the machine for the whole family to enjoy,
equipped with a thousand sheets of prerecorded music impressed upon
tinfoil, "giving endless amusement."

The design of a tinfoil phonograph had been conceptualized, then re
fined, and a myriad of future uses enumerated. The first actual model,
however, remained to be built. John Kruesi took on the assignment. On
4 December 1877, Batchelor's diary laconically noted "Kruesi made
phonograph today"; it received no more notice than the other entry,
"worked on Speaking Tel," the invention that continued to be at the top
of the laboratory's research agenda. Even the loquacious Johnson had
little more to say when he received the machine in New York: "Com

plete success. Talks plainer than telephone."
It is not clear whether the decision to immediately display the new

creation to the press was Johnson's or Edison's. What is clear is that the



36 / 

idea was not first vetted by a patent attorney-Edison would not get
around to executing his first patent application for the phonograph
until the next week. The one-week delay would later cause many diffi
culties in his efforts to secure patents in countries outside the United

States. Given his immersion in patent battles in the telegraph industry, it
is somewhat surprising to see Edison's lack of caution in proceeding
with the phonograph's unveiling. The decision can be explained, per
haps, by the absence of a professional business structure and consulting
counsel for the laboratory, by haste born of pride of accomplishment,
or from underestimating the commercial significance of the invention.

However ill-advised, the debut came off not just smoothly but bril
liantly. On 7 December 1877, Edison, Batchelor, and Johnson walked
into the New York offices of Scientific American, placed a small ma
chine on the editor's desk, and, with about a dozen people gathered
around, turned the crank. "How do you do?" asked the machine, intro

ducing itself crisply. "How do you like the phonograph?" It itself was
feeling quite well, it assured its listeners, and then cordially bid every
one a good night.

To the editors of Scientific American, the performance was utterly as
tounding. How could such a small machine mimic so accurately the
human voice? Even for someone thoroughly familiar with the science
underlying the machine, "it is impossible to listen to the mechanical
speech without his experiencing the idea that his senses are deceiving
him." Edison's choice of favoring this journal with the demonstration
was shrewd, as the editorial staff was familiar with the latest experi
ments that attempted to re-create the human voice. The state of the art
was not impressive: large machines the size of a pipe organ, endowed
with keyboards, pipes, and rubber larynx and lips were supposed to de
liver a humanlike sound but were only able to reproduce what sounded
like a single monotonous note of an organ. And yet somehow Edison
could coax what sounded like a naturally inflected human voice from
"a few pieces of metal, set up roughly on an iron stand about a foot
square.

"

So enchanted were the editors that Edison was given credit for solv-



\37

ing what had been seen as two separate problems, decoding the sound
notations (misunderstood as "dots and dashes") that were recorded on
the tinfoil, and then re-creating them. It was as if instead of having to
read the individual words, one could drop a book in a machine and it
would automatically read itself. In fact, Edison could not decode the
scratches, and had failed in his attempt to solve the first problem, that
is, translating the microscopic marks into a phonetic alphabet. But
there was no need for anyone to break the recording down into analyz
able units; the phonograph automatically played whatever had been
recorded, blithely insensible to differences in language, equally articulate
in all tongues. It was already possible to project life-sized stereoscopic
images of an individual upon a screen. "Add the talking phonograph to
counterfeit their voices," the journal suggested, "and it will be difficult
to carry the illusion of real presence much further." This was stop-the
presses news. Scientific American, which had been ready to publish its
regular issue on the day of the talking phonograph's visit, delayed pub
lication one day so that an illustrated account could be inserted, a fact
that pleased Johnson exceedingly.

Thanks to Scientific American, Edison would never again enjoy the
sweetness of anonymous obscurity. "I want to know you right bad," the
New York Sun's Amos Cummings wrote him in early January, in quest
of "something about the secrets of electricity and so on." Edison wel
comed Cummings, and William Croffut of the New York Daily Graphic,
making them feel as if they were not just reporters but friends. Edwin
Fox, of the influential New York Herald, was an old acquaintance who
had originally known Edison when they were both telegraph operators;
Edison granted him and other former operators access, too. The sensa
tional news of the phonograph's performance-so wondrous that the fact
that the phonograph was wholly mechanical and had no electrical com
ponents or power was often overlooked-brought the press to Edison's
doorstep, and he, in turn, intuitively cultivated the relationships, using
the press's hunger for more sensational discoveries for his own ends.

The technique that Edison used most effectively in handling the press
was the seemingly offhand disclosure about what he had discovered,



38 / 

leaving the impression that he was parting the curtain only enough to
provide a glimpse of what he had actually achieved and withholding the
remainder from public view. He left it to the reporters to draw their own
conclusions. The New York World referred to Edison's telephone trans
mitter and speaking telephone, the electric pen and a sewing-machine
prototype that was powered by tuning forks, as "a few selected from
hundreds equally curious and of more or less practical importance."
When the newspaper estimated the number was "hundreds," and re

garded all to be equally significant, it was in effect creating a superhero,
a man who was only thirty years old, lifted up to a plane above his con
temporaries, including Alexander Graham Bell.

One cannot help but feel a little sympathy for Bell in the competition
between the two men. The acclaim for his telephone was quickly super
seded by the attention that Edison's improvements drew, and then by
Edison's phonograph. This was especially galling because Bell had come
so close to inventing the phonograph himself. He had understood how
sound waves could be recorded on paper, and he also knew that the mo

tion of one's hand could generate waves that produced similar sounds.
Indenting a medium to save and then reproduce those waves had not
occurred to him, however. "It is a most astonishing thing to me that I
could possibly have let this invention slip through my fingers," Bell said
in early 1878. He recovered sufficiently to imagine that he could im
prove on the phonograph without violating Edison's patents, using a
technique "which can be turned to immediate account so as probably to
realize a large fortune in a couple of months or so." Time would show
that he really did have the germ of the idea for what would become for
midable competition for the phonograph-his "graphophone" would
play wax-coated discs rather than foil-wrapped cylinders-but it would
be a long while before it was ready for market. No quick, large fortune
for him, but none for Edison, either.



CHAPTER TWO



JANUARy-ApRIL 1878

ASA
BUSINESSPERSON poised to bring the phonograph to mar

ket, Thomas Edison was hindered as much as helped by expe
rience. Having long worked within the world of telegraphic

equipment, he had been perfectly placed to receive the technical inspira
tion for the phonograph. But that same world, oriented to a handful of
giant industrial customers, had nothing in common with the consumer
marketplace. It was impossible for Edison to imagine the phonograph
as the basis for a new home-entertainment industry. His lieutenants
were slow to appreciate the possibilities, too. "The Phonograph is cre
ating an immense stir," Edward Johnson wrote a business acquain
tance, "but I think it impresses people more as a toy than as a practical
machine." It was as a toy that Edison planned to first introduce the
phonograph, but he favored a passive role for himself: let others do the
manufacturing, worry about the sales, and send him a royalty check,
leaving him free to pursue a life of ceaseless inventing.

In early January 1878, Edison signed a contract with Oliver Russell to
bring out an array of toys-dolls, trains, birds-all of which would be
endowed with the power of speech or sound effects, thanks to a hidden
phonograph. To pursue opportunities for the phonograph beyond the
realm of toys, music boxes, and clocks, Edison signed with a syndicate of
five investors later that month who set up the Edison Speaking Phono
graph Company. The syndicate gave him an immediate payment of
$10,000 to "perfect" the instrument, that is, to complete the development

39



40 / 

work to ready the invention for the market. Edison would receive a
20 percent royalty on net proceeds. He insisted on embedding a clause
in the agreement that protected his future royalty payments from price
cutting: phonographs had to be sold for $80 or more unless he person
ally granted an exception.

The investors feared that Edison would exhaust the $10,000 advance
before the phonograph would be ready for the market. After the agree
ment was signed, they tried to arrange to have the money placed in a
trust. Edison would not approve, feeling (correctly) that, as one of the
investors wrote another, the proposed change "was a reflection upon
his ability to take care of himself."

According to a psychological profile published at the time in the
Phrenological Journal, his backers had to be flexible and patient, as
Edison was apt to "show irritability and people who do not understand
him may think he is impatient and fretful." The journal expressed con
cern that if Edison did not take proper care of himself, "he will become
exhausted and break down."

Improving the phonograph's sound clarity, natural intonation, and
volume of reproduced speech were Edison's principal concerns. Mecha
nizing the turning of the cylinder when it played back a recording
seemed to solve many of the problems with quality. In his lab, he used
an industrial belt to hook up a phonograph to the overhead shaft that
was connected to a steam engine, the source of the power for his ma
chine shop. The results were stunning. Edison wrote one of his repre
sentatives in Europe, "Letters can be dictated & copied with ease. The
singing is beautiful in fact I am overjoyed."

The typical office or home parlor was unlikely to have an industrial
steam engine already on the premises to provide steady power, of
course, so Edison tinkered with a weight-driven clockwork mechanism,
which replaced the hand crank and assured a steady rotation speed.
Without mechanizing the rotation, the sound of the phonograph,
whether for music or speech, left much to be desired. When Edison fi
nally wrote to Preece about his invention in February 1878, he said that
the machine had to be cranked at 120 turns per minute in order to



THE WI ZA RD 0 F' MEN L 0 PA R K \ 41

achieve acceptable sound. A clockwork mechanism also made all the
difference in comprehensibility when transcribing business letters that
had been dictated.

Listening comprehension was influenced by subjective factors, Edi
son noticed. If a person who had never heard of the phonograph was
pulled off the street and asked to listen to a recording of a simple sen
tence, he would not find it comprehensible, even if it were played a
dozen times. If that same person were first told what he was about to

hear, he would declare, after hearing it played, that it was a perfect re
production. The same phenomenon was observed when novices first lis
tened through a telephone. Edison speculated, "They do not expect or
imagine that a machine can talk hence cannot understand it]s] words."

In his lab, Edison made good progress in increasing the phonograph's
volume, using copper sheets for recording instead of tinfoil. If a speaker
shouted into the microphone, Edison was able to make the playback
distinctly audible at a distance of 475 feet. Shouting would not be prac
tical in an office setting, but the progress encouraged him to find still
better means of increasing playback volume. He got the idea that sound
could be amplified by triggering a valve releasing steam or compressed
air that would hit an enormous diaphragm, effectively sending a phono
graph's sounds outward for miles. The idea was so novel that, at the
Patent Office's urging, he separated the idea from his workup for the
phonograph and filed a separate patent application, granted in early
March 1878. He called this talking foghorn an "aerophone."

Outside of the lab, Edward Johnson was the first to successfully com
mercialize the phonograph, albeit only modestly, when he added it to
his traveling "concerts" featuring the musical telephone. His prospectus
promised that

Recitations, conversational remarks, Songs (with words), Cor
net Solos, Animal Mimicry, Laughter, Coughing, etc, etc, will be
delivered into the mouth of the machine, and subsequently re
produced by the machine with such fidelity of tone, Articula
tion' emphasis, etc., as will kindle an enthusiasm as hearty as it



42 / 

will be spontaneous .... The Apparatus is really a great discov
ery and not a mear [sic] trick or toy for producing deceptive ef
fects-the known reputation of Mr. Edison as a producer of
practical inventions is however the best guarantee I have to offer
of the genuinness [sic] of this great discovery.

His show played in small towns in New York and Pennsylvania, where
competition in the amusement business was scarce: Elmira, Cortland,
Homer, Dunkirk, Fredonia, Jamestown, Lockport, and so on, each
night a different locale. Local promoters were so pleased to receive
Johnson and his assistant that they agreed to his demand of a guaran
teed flat fee of $100 rather than accept a percentage of the gate receipts.

Johnson first had the telephone deliver piped-in music, saving the
phonograph to close the show. "You should hear me bring down the
House by my singing in the Phonograph when I failed to get a Volun
teer," Johnson wrote a colleague. "The effect when they hear me is stu
pendous, but when they hear the Phonograph reproducing my song
with all its imperfections they endanger the walls with clamor."

Johnson reported that he was paid promptly by the promoters, even
though for them the concerts "had not been pecuniarily successful."
Did Edison show him proper appreciation? He had not, Johnson
groused, nor had Edison provided him with one of the newest phono
graph models, instead sending him off to struggle with the oldest one on
hand. Johnson assumed he had been deliberately slighted, and lobbied
to attain higher standing in Edison's eyes. Others feit the same, jockey
ing for what they imagined was better position. But Edison did not give
or withhold attention deliberately. He tinkered in the lab, oblivious to
politics.

In February 1879, Edison sent out a premature announcement to an
acquaintance that the phonograph was now perfect, underlining the
word for emphasis. Perfection had not yet been attained, however, and
Edison knew it. To another friend, he allowed it was "almost perfect,"
but feit it was not yet ready to release commercially. The investors in the
Edison Speaking Phonograph Company were less fastidious about the



 \43

issues of quality that concerned Edison. They pressed for a ship date,
but Edison resisted release before the product was ready.

Bugs had to be removed. In Edison's time, the term "bugs" was used
exactly as it is today. In the early 1870s, when Edison was working
under contract on the quadruplex telegraph with a group of assistants,
the work had established the proof of concept, but the prototype was
not wholly reliable. For Edison, that was sufficient. "Boys," Edison told
his underlings, "the principle is all right, and the sharps upstairs can get
the bugs out of it. "

In early 1878, Edison's laboratory was his alone. There were no
"suits," as "sharps" would be called today, to foist a not-yet-bug-free
product upon the public. But postponing release was difficult when the
clamor of prospective customers was so loud. Most eager to get their
hands on the new invention were college professors, who wrote Edison,
pleading for the privilege of purchasing one. For example, Alfred
Mayer, a professor of physics at the Stevens Institute of Technology, in
Hoboken, New Jersey, flattered Edison with mention of "admiration of

your genius." Mayer said that the phonograph "has so occupied my
brain that I can hardly collect my thoughts to carryon my work." He
and a colleague were writing a physics textbook, which would intro
duce students to "all really worthy American work" and would replace,
they hoped, the European textbooks that everyone in their field used.
Would Edison be willing to provide a phonograph for this noble en
deavor? No one could resist such an appeal, combining the scientific
and patriotic; Edison assented.

Wanting to please the impatient scientific community, but at the same
time not wanting to endanger his own reputation by releasing the
phonograph prematurely and allowing it to be scrutinized before it was
ready, Edison found himself in an uncomfortable position. The pressure
to ship applied by the investors added to his discomfort. In early Febru
ary, he came up with what he thought was a plan that would please all
parties. His clockwork-driven machine, which reproduced sound at
about half the volume of the original, was showing sufficient promise
that he would make it the basis for a commercial model to be released



44 / 

in April. In the meantime, he would rush out five hundred copies of a
small, inexpensive model for those who could not wait. It would be
hand-cranked, capable of recording no more than fifty words, and
would be clearly advertised as nothing more than a novelty whose only
purpose was to "illustrate the principle." His backers debated the pro
posal, but came around, agreeing with Edison that "a good deal of
money could be made in selling these small traps."

Judging from the volume of correspondence coming in to the Menlo
Park laboratory, the articles in Scientific American and reprints and sec
ondhand digests of the articles carried in various newspapers had
spread the word effectively. The task at hand was readying for the mar
ket the two models, one larger, one smaller. Edison must have slapped
his forehead with irritation for having promised New York Sun reporter
Amos Cummings a month earlier that he would be willing to sit for an
interview. Cummings was comically self-deprecating ("I know no more
about electricity or electrical machinery than a cow") and polite, but
now he was also insistent in getting Edison to name a date for the prom
ised interview. Edison put him off awhile longer, perhaps hoping Cum
mings would lose interest in the campaign. Cummings was not to be
denied, however, and finally Edison capitulated. The inventor leaves no
record that he had any inkling that the resulting story that appeared in
the Sun on 22 February 1878 would change his life.

Below the comparatively restrained headline "A Marvelous Discov
ery" was a subheadline that nicely summarized the theme of the profile:
"A Man of Thirty One Revolutionizing the Whole World." This was
not the product of grandiosity on Edison's part, nor was he playing the
public relations game with a master's touch. He was, in fact, entirely
passive. He did not even go into New York to meet with Cummings.
Edison interrupted his work at Menlo Park, answered his questions,
and then resumed what he had been doing.

It was Cummings, his employer, the New York Sun, and its readers
who jointly conspired to create a mythic inventor hero to suit their
craving for a larger-than-life, yet accessible, figure. For everyone who
was not an engineer, this was a time when technology seemed to be both



 \45

overwhelming and increasingly incomprehensible. The cotton gin's
workings had been transparent; the telephone's were not. If the latest
technology itself could not be explained, at least the inventor could be
rendered in terms that made him accessible and appealing as a person.
At the same time, it was entertaining to view him as endowed with ex

traordinary power.
Permitting others to make him famous was easy. Drawing up realistic

plans for marketing the phonograph was not. If any person in Menlo
Park was in a good position to provide what we today would call a con
sumer perspective to help plan the introduction of the phonograph to
the marketplace, it would have been the person who stood clear of the
self-absorbed laboratory: Mrs. Mary Edison. She would have been ide
ally situated, that is, were she interested in offering advice, and were her
husband interested in receiving it. Edison was not receptive to guidance
from others, whether its nature was technical, strategic, or business. For
the very shortest time after they were married, Edison had viewed his
wife as his helpmeet in the lab. This was a short-lived idea-only a
month later, Edison wrote in a laboratory notebook in an agitated
hand: "My wife Dearly Beloved Cannot invent worth a Damn!!" He re
defined their roles with a conventional boundary: his sphere was work;
Mary's, the home.

In Menlo Park, the separateness of spheres remained intact even on
Sundays, the only day of the week when the laboratory was nominally
closed. After the Edisons' second child, Thomas Alva Edison Jr., arrived,
Mary would leave Saturday evenings with the children to visit relatives
in Newark, not returning until the wee hours of Sunday or even Mon
day. With his family away, Edison often spent Sundays at the lab.

One of the rare instances in which we have a glimpse of the two
spending a free evening together is in January 1878, just when the
phonograph's birth had been announced in the press. The Edisons joined
the Batchelors for an evening's entertainment in New York, where they
saw a magic show that was running on Broadway. The featured per
former was Robert Heller, who claimed expertise in "necromancy and
diablerie" and had unsettled clergy with posters commanding passersby



46 / 

to "Go to HELLer's." The evening's entertainment would be the first

thing that came to Edison's mind when a reporter soon after asked Edi
son if he wasn't "a good deal of a wizard." Edison laughed, shrugged off
the label, and suggested that no one deserved it. He recalled he had just
seen Heller, all but one of whose illusions Edison claimed to have fig
ured out.

For members of the general public, the advanced edge of applied sci
ence was not easily distinguishable from Broadway magic, creating the
opportunity for someone like John Worrell Keely, an inventor-a title
open to anyone-and a fraud. Claiming to have discovered a new phys
ical force resulting from "intermolecular vibrations of ether," Keely in
1874 had built a machine that was supposedly powered by no other
source, and invited the public to invest in the Keely Motor Company.
He did not succeed in fooling all the people all the time, but he fooled
some for decades. At the beginning of Keely's rise to fame, Edison had
been intrigued and had visited Keely's workshop to ask some prelimi
nary questions, intending to return with Batchelor for a round-the
clock vigil to watch the Keely engine in action. But when Keely balked
at providing more information, Edison canceled his plans. "The one
thing necessary for me to know," Edison later told a companion on a
train ride in 1878 without saying what that one necessary thing was,
"he refused to impart, and without this information I might as well
look at a pile of broken machinery as at the motor." (After Keely's death
in 1898, his workshop was examined closely-and the discovery of
hidden tubes for conveying compressed air brought a posthumous end
to Keely's dogged claims.)

Not so long before his visit to Keely, Edison had himself been at the
center of a heated scientific controversy when he had made claims

about the ether, too. The first time he had drawn attention to himself
outside of the world of telegraphy had not been in 1877, with the
phonograph's invention, but two years earlier, when he had publicly an
nounced, overly hastily, that he had made a fundamental discovery in
physics of the "etheric force." Having noticed sparks flying between
parts of his telegraphic apparatus that were not conducting currents,



 \47

Edison carried out investigations that appeared to rule out scientific
explanations based on conventional knowledge of electricity. He did
not think he was on the threshold of a perpetual-motion machine, but
he did think the etheric force could revolutionize telegraphy, making
possible transmissions through uninsulated wire, whether on land or
through sea. For a brief moment, Edison's claims were treated in some
scientific quarters respectfully, even in the Scientific American. Refuta
tion and ridicule followed. Edison was defensive, but was also embar
rassed and chastened; he would never again make as large a claim of
discovery in science again. (Years later, however, scientists came to real
ize that Edison had stumbled across high-frequency electromagnetic
waves-the basis for radio, and ultimately an ironical coda for the in
ventor who would live long enough to personally witness the radio
boom of the 1920s yet stubbornly dismiss its commercial future.)

Edison's unhappy experience in 1875 when he had announced the

discovery of the etheric force prematurely drained his interest in taking
an active role of self-promoter. But in early 1878 he was amenable to
playing the passive role of principal subject in newspaper profiles, and
Menlo Park was perfectly placed for this purpose. It was sparsely popu
lated, as if it were a world removed from New York City, yet it was also

conveniently located a short train ride away. It sat close enough to the
city to be regarded proprietarily by New York-based reporters as their
own. Had it been located, say, between Philadelphia and Washington,
D.C., Edison's lab would not have received visits by representatives of
the New York press, and without them, the story of Edison's lab would
have remained one of merely local interest.

Amos Cummings jumped ahead of his rival reporters and put himself
into the Menlo Park story he reported. He described in detail his arrival
at the laboratory and initial impressions, including the setting itself as a
member of the dramatis personae. The laboratory was depicted with
imagery anticipating Henry Adams's later twin images of the Virgin and
the Dynamo: the long wooden structure was likened to "an old-fashioned
Baptist tabernacle," but on its roof were nine lightning rods, and on its
side were the twelve telegraph lines.



48 / 

Cummings walked in the front door and found himself stepping into
an office, in which an unidentified man was studying a drawing. Having
asked for Edison, he was told, "Go right upstairs, and you'll find him
singing into some instrument." The rarity of a visitor such as Cummings
is underlined by Edison's availability, uninsulated by a personal secretary
or other gatekeeper. Up the stairs, and there "Prof. Edison" was, seated
at a table. Grimy hands, uncombed hair, dirty shirt, muddy shoes, "he
looked like anything but a professor," Cummings would write, forget
ting that his subject was not, in fact, a professor. Edison was also de
scribed as utterly lacking pretentiousness. "A man of common sense
would feel at home with him in a minute," Cummings reported, "but a
nob or prig would be sadly out of place." This motif-the genius who
spoke plainly-proved so irresistible that it became the one used in al
most every profile of Edison for the rest of his life.

Edison had virtually no prior experience with a reporter who was
about to make him the subject of a long profile, but he was naturally
adept at steering the conversation in the direction he wished, which was
to describe the future commercial possibilities of the phonograph. Even
though he was privately focused on its use as a dictation machine in the
office, he sensed that the general readership of a newspaper would be
interested in other applications. The arias of opera soprano Adelina
Patti could be recorded, Edison suggested, and enjoyed in the parlors
anywhere, selling "millions." He lamented the lost opportunity to
record the last benediction of just-deceased Pope Pius IX; the recording
could have been easily duplicated for every Roman Catholic in the
world. A great public service, and a great business opportunity, too. He
did the arithmetic: at $5 each, "there was a fortune in it."

The more he talked, the more he looked out to the future. He was

prescient in some cases: audiobooks ("Say I hire a good elocutionist to
read David Copperfield"); Nixon's Oval Office recordings ("I could fix
a machine in a walL ... Political secrets ... might be brought to
light"); movies with sound ("The pictures and gestures of the orator, as
well his voice, could be exactly reproduced, and the eyes and ears of the
audience charmed by the voice and manner of the speaker"). Edison



 \49

also thought parents would hide recorders so that they could in the
comfort of their own bed listen to "all the spooney courtship of their
daughters and lovers."

Edison's talking foghorn, the aerophone, which conveniently remained
unfinished, provided still more incredible possibilities. He suggested in
stalling one inside the mouth of "the Goddess of Liberty that the French
men are going to put upon Bedloe's Island that would make her talk so
loud that she could be heard by every soul on Manhattan Island."

Cummings meekly took it all in, unquestioningly, and was so eager
to depict Edison as a genius that he reported as fact details that were
empirical impossibilities. In front of Cummings, Edison recorded his
favorite ditty for a phonograph demonstration, "Mary Had a Little
Lamb," played it normally, and then reversed the cylinder, which Cum
mings claimed then yielded the words in reverse order and distinctly:
"Lamb little a had Mary."

When Cummings, the polite guest, asked Edison how he had discov
ered the phonograph, Edison concocted a great drama in the wrong
place, not when he and his assistants had first tried to record on a strip
of paper, but later, when he directed his chief machinist to build the first

cylinder model, the successful testing of which was noted in the lab
books with scarcely a yawn. Edison told the reporter that his lab mates
"laughed at me" when he proposed making the cylinder, and bets in
volving cigars and cash showed that his belief in success was matched
by his associates' skepticism that it would work in the first trial, which
it did.

With Cummings faithfully recording his every utterance, Edison
showed an impish side, recording serious verse, and then overlaying
upon it jeers and gibes ("Oh, cork yourself!"). He saved the best part of
the demonstration for the end, when he recorded "Mad dog!" a half
dozen times "and then amused himself by turning the crank back
ward." Cummings does not spell out the profane result, but it was not,
as he claimed to have heard before, the original words merely reversed.

Cummings headed for the train, leaving his readers with a final
charming image of Edison, returning to work on his phonograph "like





a delighted boy." The reporter had obtained materials for a flattering
portrait; the inventor had lost only a few hours of work time. But when
Cummings's story appeared in the New York Sun, the seemingly intimate
portrait of the "genius" in his laboratory created a sensation, setting off
a mad rush of reporters to Menlo Park to write their own profiles of the
inventor in his lab. And with the reporters came others who wanted to

see "the Professor" for themselves. "I find 1 cannot get away," Edison
wrote one of his attorneys, complaining only semiseriously. "Every day
a dozen of the heavy lights of literature and science come here."

The Edison stories served to whet readers' appetites for still more,
The result was that Menlo Park became a place known far and wide
around the world, and so closely was the place name associated with
Edison's laboratory that it entered the nation's consciousness and
stayed, even though Edison himself would live and work there only
three more years, and would spend more than four decades at another
location in New Jersey.

The more that Edison spoke with reporters about his ideas and plans,
the more giddy he became. He was untroubled by doubt that he might
lack the time and resources to accomplish all of the side projects that he
mentioned, seriously or casually. Readers learned that he not only had
invented a new painkiller cocktail, but also had invented a hearing aid
for his own use. His "telephonoscope" was supposedly inconspicuous,
yet enabled Edison to hear" a cow chew a quarter of a mile off." When

letters came pouring in, imploring him to commercialize the invention,
he announced that he had assigned two of his assistants to work on
tests, and was confident he would have a hearing aid on the market
within months.

His aerophone remained incomplete. But when Vanity Fair Tobacco
and Cigarettes wrote "Prof. Edison, Menlo Park," asking if he could
adapt his "airaphone" to proclaim "Smoke Vanity Fair," Edison wrote
back that he could, though it would take him a while to "perfect" it.
The aerophone made for wonderful copy, but reporters found it impos
sible to see it for themselves. "I am very sorry," Edison apologized to a
New York World reporter in March 1878, "that 1 cannot show you the



THE WI ZA RD 0 F MEN LOP ARK \ 5 I

aerophone today. I have just sent the application for a patent to Wash
ington, and have taken the machine I had here to pieces." The reporter
said this was a "great disappointment," but Edison, "one of the most
courteous gentlemen in the world," covered for the machine's absence
with a detailed explanation of its supposed capabilities.

The aerophone and the telephonoscope could not materialize be
cause Edison was woefully understaffed. Even though he conveyed to
reporters the impression that his laboratory was home to a staff too
large to name, in fact it was small. In early March, he hired a few more
hands, but that gave him a total of ten or twelve assistants, eight of
whom were working on the phonograph, and the others on the tele
phone. At the same time that Edison was working on a new version of
the phonograph that employed a disc rather than foil wrapped around a
cylinder, he was also serving as host to increasing numbers of reporters
and visitors, performing the same parlor games, answering the same
repetitive questions. In the transition from unknown to iconic figure,
Edison still felt free to say whatever he wished, so one entertainment he
concocted was a variation of the one in which he had heckled himself in

an overlay after first recording a serious reading. In the new version, he
mimicked a sermon, in a mock-solemn drawl: "Ladies and gentlemen, I
have come-before you this evening-to deliver for your-benefit-a
discourse on travels-in Bible lands. Allow-me before commencing
to sta-a-ate-" Then he stopped, returned the stylus to the beginning,
and recorded a running commentary: "Oh, give us a rest! Oh dry up! Sit
down! Put him out! Hire a hall! Oh, that'll do! Bah!"

When the Sun's Amos Cummings had visited the Menlo Park labora

tory in February, he was the only outsider on the premises. When his
competitors followed him, however, they bumped into one another.
Edison complained that "the reporters that come down here have al
ready [so] unstrung my nerves that I think of taking to the woods," but
this seems more a handy pretext rather than genuine complaint. He
stayed where he was and left the door to his lab wide open. No one had
to tell him that the feature stories were the best kind of advertising
possible: disseminated for free.



52 / 

If anything, the advertising was too effective, creating demand for the
phonograph that caught the Edison Speaking Phonograph Company by
surprise. Phonograph Company investor Charles Cheever wrote an
other board member in mid-March that "the tide has started itself so

fast that I have been unable in spite of all that I can do to hold it back
until we had the small Phonograph ready to sell." Cheever had helped
whip up the public's interest by holding public exhibitions in New York
City, packing in three hundred people each afternoon, and drawing in
the influential figures who were concentrated in Manhattan. William
Cullen Bryant was so tickled he asked to come again with friends. An
Astor, whose interest was piqued by Bryant, would not deign to rub
shoulders with hoi polloi in the public exhibition, but she did ask for a
private exhibition for herself and forty friends.

Having received so much attention, gratis, the phonograph seemed
poised for a sensational commercial launch. Gardiner Hubbard, the
father-in-law of Alexander Graham Bell and another backer of the

Phonograph Company, was so confident that demand would outstrip
supply that he developed a plan for maximal exploitation of the imag
ined shortage. Why not announce that sales agents must place their or
ders-and pay in full-in advance? Figuring that each unit would only
cost $15 to manufacture and would sell for $100, Hubbard gleefully
rubbed his hands together, calculating paper profits. "We incur no
risk," he wrote a fellow investor.

This proposal ran into opposition. Cheever was more concerned that
early customers remain happy customers, and wondered aloud whether
it would be better to lease the first small phonographs, once they were
ready for release, rather than selling them. He knew that the shortcom
ings of the first-generation models would be a public embarrassment to
the company as soon as the next-generation machine was released. Cus
tomers would naturally want "the most perfect one going and not a
crude model." If the company put all the machines out on lease, then
it could "call them in and smash them up." This praiseworthy idea
disappeared.



\S3

The principals of the Edison Speaking Phonograph Company de
bated various business models, and counted in advance the coming
profits, without asking Edison's opinion. They encouraged Edison to
hasten his work on finishing the two phonograph models, and excluded
him from their discussions about the business. Edison had opinions
about everything, however, including marketing. When asked by re
porters, he doggedly insisted that the phonograph be purchased by
executives for dictating letters, which would be transcribed and dis
patched by lesser-paid office boys. "They can thus save hundreds of
dollars a year," Edison asserted, without explaining how exactly the
savings would be captured by executives who were paid a flat salary,
not by the number of letters sent out per day.

Editorialists and feature writers were not much interested in techni

cal details; they credulously reported Edison's claim that he could
record forty thousand words on a single disc when, in fact, he was
nowhere close to being able to do so. They were more interested in pro
jecting a heroic image of the inventor, "the Napolean of invention," as
the New York Sun dubbed him. Convention demanded that he be given
a tender, domestic side, too. A visiting reporter read much in Edison's

pat on the head of "a bright little three-year-old boy who called him
'papa' with a genuine affection that showed, though the most remark
able inventor of the age, he is by no means dead to the less exciting
episodes and battles of a domestic world."

Much was said about the phonograph as a source of humor, running
along the lines that had been established from the beginning: It would
be the bane of philandering husbands (surreptitiously recording, for
example, "Hurry up, Betty, and give me a kiss before the old hen comes
down") and a boon to sharp-tongued mothers-in-law. The Washington
Herald described the phonograph (on 1 April 1878) as the "outside
agent of the divorce courts" and urged the passing of a law "making it a
capital offense to manufacture or sell this species of deadly weapon."
Edison, too, was the subject of humorous editorials, vilifying him for in
venting too many things. The New York Times said with a rather macabre



54 / 

sense of humor that "something ought to be done to Mr. Edison, and
there is a growing conviction that it had better be done with a hemp rope."

The jokes and spoofs were entertaining, but the reader was suscep
tible to being confused, too. The phonograph, described in close detail
in the Sun's long profile "A Marvelous Discovery," which had started
the stampede to Menlo Park, was regarded by many as fantastic. Edison
received three hundred letters that denounced the reporter's mendacity.
One professor urged Edison to protect his reputation and publicly dis
avow the claims that had been made in the article. "The idea of a talk

ing machine is ridiculous, but the article is so ingeniously constructed,
and some persons are so ignorant of the first principles of science, that
they will be apt to believe it true, unless you deny it."

Truth appeared to be spoof; and spoof, truth. The New York Daily
Graphic's William Croffut wrote of a lunch that Edison had served him
on a recent visit to Menlo Park, at the conclusion of which Edison ex

plained that he made all of the food "out of the dirt taken from the cel
lar." In an almost plausible fashion, Edison provides a description of
how he had found a way to speed up organic processes by inorganic
means. Croffut was amazed: "This food machine is going to dispense
almost entirely with farmers and stock-raisers, with millers and bak
ers-why it seems to me you are going to abolish all occupations except
the manufacture of your machines." Oh, no, Edison replies, laughing.
But he did modestly allow that it would "certainly revolutionize the
world."

The publication date of 1 April for "A Food Creator" should have
served to put readers on alert. And the final paragraph, in which the
narrator is awakened by a train conductor, groggily realizing that he
had been napping and was only then arriving at Menlo Park, clearly
showed that the preceding story had been a parody of the boilerplate
Edison profile. But just as some listeners failed to hear disclaimers that
were interspersed in Orson Welles's 1938 broadcast of The War of the
Worlds, so, too, some readers, and some newspapers, failed in 1878 to

appreciate Croffut's nicely crafted spoof. Though the hoax was clearly
revealed at the end, the New York Daily Graphic pointed out after-



THE WI ZA ROO F" MEN LOP ARK \ 55

ward, "a good many, with the careless American habit of hasty reading,
seemed to have stopped short of that revelation."

Edison was tickled. He told Croffut the article was the "most inge
nious hoax I have ever seen." Following its appearance, he received let
ters asking for the price of the food machine and the date when it would
be ready for the market. While testing the telephone the next day, he
playfully acted out his role in the parody in the presence of another vis
iting reporter, asking Charles Batchelor, "By the way, don't you want
half a dozen of my latest? Invented since you left this morning. It

changes fire clay into rice pudding and corn meal into gold dust. War
ranted for nine hundred and ninety-nine years."

Ten days after his spoof appeared, Croffut published a serious profile
of Edison that differed from the New York Sun's only in its ingenuity in
finding new ways to extol Edison's genius. It was Croffut who coined
the new nickname "the Wizard of Menlo Park" (an improvement on
Croffut's previous attempt at coining a new name for Edison: "the Jer
sey Columbus").

In Chicago, George Bliss, the head of the electric pen company,
ribbed Edison that "the Mania has broken out this way-School-girls
write compositions on Edison. The funny papers publish squibs on Edi
son. The religious papers write editorials on Edison. The daily papers
write up his life ... Why don't the Graphic fill up exclusively with Edi
son and [have] done with [it]." Croffut had similar news: "Every paper
I take up is full of you-not less than 190,547 columns in American

newspapers every day. "

For Edison, these reports were entertaining, but they did not affect
his life in any noticeable way. The only immediate change was the new
need to devote time responding to correspondence from strangers. Re
ferring to what he called "Begging letters," Edison wrote Uriah Painter,
one of the phonograph company investors, "My god how they little
suspect-" and left the thought unfinished; it was probably something
like" - I have yet to secure my own financial security." In a recent pro
file, he had patted the phonograph in his lab, saying it was his "baby,"
and he expected that it would "grow up to be a big feller and support



56 / 

me in myoid age." In the present, it still was an infant and was the one
being supported.

Edison had no idea how greedily the public grabs for a piece of a per
son who has become famous-he thought he could personally respond
to every stranger who wrote him for an autograph or for money. This
quickly proved impractical. Six days after the publication of "The Wiz
ard of Menlo Park," he told Painter he had written fifty-two letters that
night and had sent twenty-three more to Edward Johnson to handle.

A "Begging letter" might begin with mention of some personal con
nection. Mrs. Andrew Coburn, for example, wrote Edison on behalf of
her husband, who had worked for him ("you will remember") in his
Newark shop. "I am entirely beaten down," she wrote, as she described
her husband's confinement to bed with a fractured elbow that had be

come infected and now required amputation. Could he assist them? He
sent her a check for $5.

But this was not the conclusion of the episode. A few weeks later, Mrs.
Coburn was back with a request for $50 as a loan to start a sock-and

leggings business. Then Mr. Coburn dictated a follow-up letter, and sep
arately the surgeon wrote asking for payment for the amputation. Mrs.
Coburn followed the next month with a renewed plea for assistance.

Not all the begging was done by the less powerful. Edison received a
plea for financial assistance from an official in a position of power over
his professional future: Zenas Wilber, who was the Patent Office's chief
examiner of electrical apparatus. He said he had to borrow $200 or

$250 "immediately" and "confidentially." It placed Edison in a difficult
position. He had Batchelor send Wilber $200 under a name and address
that could not be traced back to Menlo Park.

Wilber would do Edison a favor weeks later when Edison made a

rare foray outside of his laboratory and arrived in Washington, D.C.,
on 18 April for a two-day visit. He had accepted an invitation from Pro
fessor George Barker, of the University of Pennsylvania, to demonstrate
the phonograph at the National Academy of Sciences meeting. Before
the meeting, a reporter with a local paper happened to see Edison
standing alone outside of the Smithsonian, looking around intently, ap-




parently studying the rich foliage and taking in a beautiful blue sky. The
reporter approached and, as a conversation starter, ventured, "Hand
some grounds, these." "Yes," Edison agreed, then pointed to what he
had been studying so closely: "What an immense stretch of telegraph
wire without a support."

The phonograph demonstration was set up in the office of the acad
emy's secretary, a place that did not accommodate all who wished to
witness the performance. The double doors in the adjoining hall were
removed so more people could crowd in for a peek. Edison sat at the
secretary's desk, nervously twisting a rubber band, while Charles Batch
elor recorded and played back the ditties and sounds that had become a
routine. In the reception following, Edison was described as "shy and
shrinking, and did not show off at all ornamentally." He confessed to a
reporter that he did not like to be pressed by crowds, and he had not en
joyed the academy president's welcome because he had not been able to
hear a word that was said.

Having come to town, there was no respite from the press of the curi
ous. The demonstrations continued all day and into the evening, and
continued later in the Washington office of the Philadelphia Inquirer.
Finally, Edison was set free and joined academy members at the u.s.
Naval Observatory for a look at the stars. It had been a long day, and
was not yet over. It was only then that Zenas Wilber came up with a
brilliant idea: President Rutherford Hayes should not miss out on hear

ing the phonograph for himself, and should get a demonstration before
morning arrived. Calling up the White House was easily accomplished:
Hayes liked to answer the phone himself (there were only a few dozen
telephones in the entire capital at the time). Nor did Wilber, the patent
examiner, have difficulty speaking with Hayes, the president: they were
cousins. A command performance by Edison was quickly arranged, and
he headed to the White House, arriving around eleven o'clock that

night. He showed off the phonograph for the president for about an
hour and a half. His country asked still more of him: the First Lady and
several of her friends wanted ademonstration, too, so Edison had to
run through the routine still one more time, finishing about 2:30 A.M.



58 / 

The second day brought more attention. Edison, Batchelor, and the

phonograph were installed in the office of the Senate's committee on

patents, then the House's committee, attracting drop-in visits from
members and leaving Congress without a quorum for nearly an hour.
After Edison's return home, the press added new expressions to the lex
icon of hagiography. Having been honored by the most distinguished
men in the country, the New York Sun reasoned, Edison had received
more attention than if Robert Fulton, Sir Isaac Newton, or Galileo had

appeared. Beneath Edison's unassuming appearance, a reporter for an
other paper sensed something else hiding beneath his hat: "a kingly
crown."



CHAPTER THREE



MAy-AUGUST 1878

THE
PHONOGRAPH GAVE EDISON an opportunity in mid-1878

that would never reappear in his eighty-four-year-long life. With
no other invention did he have as open a field without competi

tion; he was perfectly positioned to move forward. He had become
renowned. Financial backers were standing at the ready, impatiently
waiting for the machine to be "perfected" and made ready for sale, and
were willing to accept a small, toylike placeholder in the meantime. He
had at his disposal his own development lab and complete machine
shop, with a staff that took orders from no one but himself. He had all
the materials that he conceivably might need at his fingertips. But just
then, when the whole world seemed to be focused on him and his me
chanical marvel, Edison simply could not muster the focus to complete
its development. The moment passed before he realized it, and it would
be ten years before he would return to work on what he called affec

tionately his" baby."
In retrospect, the late spring and summer of 1878 is a time easily

overlooked because it is of interest for what did not happen. Put simply,
Edison failed to read the market. Without question, he was distracted

by the attention that came with celebrity. Some of his admirers sought
to protect him from distraction and worry. He was publicly hailed in a
letter to the editor of a Washington paper as a member of a class of
"martyrs, being devoid of acquisitiveness" and ill-suited to "competing
in the scramble for material wealth." The writer urged the federal

59



60 / 

government to provide Edison with the material rewards he could not
earn himself, to save him from the fate of an Eli Whitney, "begging for
bread," or a Charles Goodyear, dying in a poorhouse. Edison himself,
however, never indicated he gave thought to, let alone desired, subsidy,
nor did he see his work as a noble enterprise in service to humanity.
Typical was his remark to an associate about Edward Johnson's travel
ing phonograph show: "I told him what he should go for [is] dollars &
cents for the Phono Co as they wasn't after glory but the [money] of an
admiring public."

Edison's own point of view was unabashedly commercial, but by tem
perament, he tended to flit from project to project. Most were minor in
ambition and were left in an incomplete state. This had been his pattern
when he was working in the field of telegraphic equipment, and the
phonograph's own serendipitous invention came from a tangential ob
servation that had led away from the original project. He did not impose
upon himself limits to his inventive excursions. He would strike off from

the main path, follow an interest, then branch off from that path, and
then from that one, too. With the work on the main phonograph still in
complete, and with even the placeholder toys failing to work (the Edison
Speaking Phonograph Company's Gardiner Hubbard lamented, "We
shall not sell any of them"), Edison decided to renew experimental work
on a commercial hearing aid. He had not actually built a working model
of a "lap megaphone," but he was confident that he would be able to
pick up a $10,000 prize offered by Joseph Medill, the editor of the
Chicago Tribune, for the hearing aid that would best ameliorate Medill's
deafness (Edison never sustained interest in ameliorating his own). That
project was itself pushed aside, still incomplete, while Edison chased the
invention of a microphone that he thought would serve as a successor to
the stethoscope. Nothing came of either diversion.

The Edison Speaking Phonograph Company was a venture separate
from Edison's own Menlo Park lab, which meant Edison could not be

ejected. The Company's investors could, and did, beg and implore Edi
son to push on with his work on the phonograph, but they could not
force him to heed their wishes or anyone else's.



\61

Edison arranged his business affairs so that he could maintain com
plete independence, which required that those closest to him should not
have strong opinions of their own. The composition of his inner circle
of subordinates may not have been important in any case, as the best
advice available to him outside of the lab was mediocre, too. Uriah

Painter, one of the Speaking Phonograph Company's investors, led Edi
son to believe at the beginning of May that phonograph exhibitions
would be wildly profitable. "Your receipts will be immense," Painter
wrote, double underlined for emphasis, as he made plans to hold a
thousand public exhibitions of the phonograph within the next ninety
days. Edward Johnson, however, who was the first one out in the field
actually holding exhibitions, was finding the profits uneven and was
tortured by the thought that he was so close, yet so far, from touching
the "money floating all about just baskets full of it thrown into ones
face." It would turn out that even though eighty men had paid the com
pany $100 each for the privilege of undergoing training and heading
out in the exhibition business for themselves, their efforts would result
in total royalty payments to Edison of $1,031.91.

Imagining fabulous profits to be earned even from merely hawking
Edison's portrait, Painter offered Mathew Brady exclusive rights to Edi
son's portrait, in exchange for a royalty of 25 percent. Painter had to
persuade Edison to sign off on the arrangement and stop by Brady's
Washington studio during his visit to the city. He assured Edison that
100,000 prints could be sold in the upcoming summer, pointing out
that P. T. Barnum had sold 150,000 Brady prints of Tom Thumb. The
best portrait that came out of the sitting shows Edison dressed in a

dark, dignified suit, seated by a table upon which sits the phonograph, a
metallic contraption that resembled a lathe. The inventor peers at the
camera with no expression. Lacking anything that is visually striking,
the photograph needed someone like Barnum to push its sales. But no
one at the Edison Speaking Phonograph Company was much interested
in this sideline, and even Painter, who was offered the opportunity to
sell the prints, seems to have lost interest, too.

Edison could have used Barnum's talents to exploit the crowds drawn



62 / 

to Menlo Park, too. An increase in visits to the lab by tourists and self
invited, self-designated VIPs suggested Edison's celebrity was growing.
Work at the lab could not proceed smoothly, however, when interrupted
by the arrival of groups of outsiders in quest of entertainment. On a not
atypical day, a group of thirty businesspeople, inhibitions loosened by a
"bucket of punch" they had brought along, took possession of the labo
ratory, leaving Edison no recourse but to disappear, wondering what he
was going to do when a party of one hundred more visitors, on their

way down from Boston, arrived. Editorial writers began to notice and
speak out on his behalf. A Newark paper sensibly suggested that he
limit visitors' access to the lab- "the electrical Mecca" -to just one

day a week. Another paper suggested that a separate building- "a the
ater or entertainment hall" -be built on the laboratory's grounds for
accommodating visitors and sparing Edison the indignity and waste of
his own time when he had to spend "hours each day shouting and
singing into a phonograph for the amusement of a crowd of unscientific
people. "

Edison had not plotted a course to obtain attention; the attention had
come to him. True, when it arrived, he had swung the door open to re
ceive it. The problem, he was now discovering, was that once open, it
could not be shut, even if he sincerely wanted to do so, and he was am
bivalent in any case.

Edison was cooperative, for example, when William Croffut asked
him for a letter praising his paper, the Daily Graphic, suitable for publi
cation. The letter from Edison that was subsequently published was not
typeset but reproduced photographically, keeping intact Edison's best
calligraphy. "Dear Sir, I feel inclined to thank you for the pleasant
things you have said about me and the Phonograph," the letter read,
going on to single out Croffut's April Fool's Day hoax for special praise.
It appeared to be a sincere testimonial, written by a new celebrity who
also was able to work in mention of coming improvements to his

phonograph that "will soon justify all the hopes of its friends." What
the letter did not disclose was that Edison had agreed to Croffut's re
quest, but only on condition that Croffut write the letter that would ap-



\63

pear in Edison's name. Croffut had sent his draft with polite noises
("bless you! don't follow a word if it seems not quite the thing"), and
Edison had recopied it in his own hand without a single modification.

Croffut, on his part, acted less as a reporter than as Edison's unoffi
cial amanuensis, recording whatever Edison claimed without indepen
dently sorting through Edison's pronouncements to distinguish truth
from wishful thinking. An example of Croffut's apparent gullibility:
While giving Croffut a tour of the lab, Edison had told the story of a
dog that had wandered up to the lab's door and whose bark was then
recorded. "We have hung up that sheet yonder," Edison said, "and now
we can make him bark any time." Not true. Edison could not make the

dog bark again, and he knew it, because once the foil was removed
from the cylinder, it could not be reinstalled on the cylinder in playable
form. This problem rendered the tinfoil phonograph virtually useless,
except for the limited purpose for which it was being used, that is, as a
machine permanently in demonstration mode. Croffut was silent, either
because he was completely credulous, or perhaps because he knew of
this problem but calculated his own career was best served by preserv
ing the mythic image he was working so hard to create.

When Edison had been an unknown inventor who specialized in the
telegraphic equipment business, reporters had not sought him out and
begged him for an opportunity to become his friend. Now, however, in
early May 1878, sycophantic journalists led him to believe that he was
wise in all manner of subjects, far afield of the electrical business. If they
wished to listen to his opinions, and they did indeed, he was glad to
hold forth on any topic, such as the relationship of diet to national des
tiny, a lecture delivered over lunch while digging into strawberry short
cake, strawberries and cream, and an apple dumpling.

I have a theory of eating. Variety-that is the secret of wise eat
ing. The Nations that eat the most kinds of food are the greatest
Nations .... The rice-eating Nations never progress; they never
think or act anything but rice, rice, rice, forever. Look at the po
tato and black-bread eaters of Ireland; though naturally bright,



64 / 

the Irish in Ireland are enervated by the uniformity of their
food.... On the other hand, what is, take it all in all, the most

highly enlightened Nation, the most thrifty, graceful, cultured
and accomplished? Why, France, of course, where the cuisine
has infinite variety. When the Roman Empire was at its height
the table was a marvel of diversity-they fed on nightingales'
tongues, and all sorts of dainty dishes.... Some say I get the
cart before the horse, and that the diversified food is the result
of a high civilization rather than its cause, but I think I am right
about it.

This was a role, pontificating on demand, that was quite agreeable to
him. As the years passed, it came to supplant the actual work of invent
ing. His thinking about an ideal diet for himself would change radically,
however. In 1878, he said he wanted to live up to his own theory about
the salutary benefits of variety and" live so that I could change my diet a
thousand times a year." This gave way in his later years to ever more re
strictive diets, each change publicly chronicled as no alimentary detail
was too private for the reporters who would always attend to him, from
when he was thirty-one until he died at the age of eighty-four.

Following his sensational April visit to Washington, D.C., he was del
uged with invitations to make personal appearances for sundry groups
and occasions. He told a visiting reporter that he had no interest at all
in making such appearances. ("You shouldn't have become famous, if
you didn't want to be talked about and bored by strangers," the re
porter replied.) Edison turned down the invitations across the board,
but he made two exceptions when he was still glowing from the warm
reception received in Washington. The unsatisfying results in both cases
served to show him that the role of traveling celebrity was not to his
liking.

In May, he accepted an invitation to speak at the Academy of Mount
Saint Vincent, a Catholic girls' school on the Hudson River, as a favor



\65

to an old telegrapher friend. His hearing disability loomed as a larger
issue when he was on the road. His hosts did not know how best to

overcome its isolative effects (and Edison had yet to finish that "lap
megaphone" he had been talking up with the press). When he was
taken to the chapel during Mass, he strained to hear the celebrants'
words. (When the priest touched his arm to let him know it was time to

go, Edison misinterpreted the gesture, thinking it was a rebuke for not
showing proper reverence, and stooped down almost to his knees, re
maining with bowed head. No one knew how to clear up the misunder

standing with the service still in progress.) Before Batchelor began the
phonograph exhibition conducted before the students, Edison took a
seat on the platform, "instantly becoming absorbed with some train of
thought," and apparently heard little or nothing of the school's wel
come. For him, the highlight of the day appears to have been at the end
when he and Batchelor, after saying their good-byes, raced each other
down the hill, oblivious to the rain and the propriety expected of the
eminent inventor and his assistant.

A few weeks later, Edison was lured out of the lab one more time, for
an invitation-only appearance at a reception held after a public exhibi
tion of the phonograph in New York City. He was introduced by
Hilbourne Roosevelt-organ builder, investor in the Edison Speaking
Phonograph Company, and first cousin of Theodore-who said he
"had almost been obliged to use force to drag the inventor from his
work." The occasion was what a political campaigner today would call
a meet and greet, and only the professional pol could be expected to
have the stomach for it. At midnight, Edison excused himself, explain
ing he had to "get home and work."

As for family matters, hagiographers did not hesitate to see Mr. and
Mrs. Edison as a perfect couple. One journalist described Mary as "a
charming woman, and is evidently the counterpart of himself, and one
would know, the moment he put his eyes on both, that they were ex
actly suited to one another." This scene, painted by a stranger with
a ripe imagination, was based on nothing at all. Edison's almost total
withdrawal from the family's domestic sphere was the leitmotif that



66 / 

would be the one Edison and his assistants chose for Edison's life narra

tive: the tireless inventor. Edward Johnson pretended to confide to a re
porter that Edison's "only bad habit" was work, so consuming that it
constituted "a dissipation." For the last ten years, Johnson said in
1878, Edison had averaged eighteen hours a day at his desk. So im
mersed in work's demands, he "does not go home for days, either to eat
or sleep," even though his house was only a few steps away. On another
occasion, a reporter observed that when his five-year-old daughter Mar
ion came to the lab to fetch him for dinner, Edison had told her he
would "be along in a minute" -and then had become engrossed in
something else in the lab. "That's nothing," Batchelor had explained
when the reporter commented on Edison's susceptibility to distraction.
"When we get interested in a thing here we stay all day and all night
sometimes, and Edison hardly stops to eat even if they send his meals to
him." What Mary Edison thought of her husband's absences was not
recorded. She was only rarely included in the standard newspaper pro
file, and even then, merely as the ornament.

Whether it was for a banquet in the city or supper at home, it was dif
ficult to extract Edison from the lab. As the months passed following
the phonograph's first public exhibitions in early 1878 and he failed to
produce a production model, Edison remained maddeningly blas. He
puttered and procrastinated, his attention flitting from one side project
to the next.

The "telescopophon " was one of the distractions that held his atten
tion, but not long enough, it would turn out, for it to ever reach commer
cial release. This was a giant megaphone that performed marvelously
when used as a pair, one for speaking, the other for listening, placed a
mile apart on hilltops. Reporters were invited to try it themselves-one
claimed he could hear a voice that was two miles away and out of

sight-an entertainment so diverting that no one bothered to ask Edi
son details of how he was going to miniaturize it to make good on his
claim that this nonelectrical mechanical device would enable the par

tially deaf to "hear every whisper on the stage of the largest theater,"



\67

yet be so small that it could be used "without your next neighbor know
ing that you have one."

Any sense of urgency was blunted by pleasing news arriving from
Paris, where the phonograph's exhibition was drawing large crowds.
Theodore Puskas, Edison's business agent in Europe, had had to over
come the skepticism of the French Academy of Sciences, to whom he
had first presented the machine. The scientists thought the machine's
playback was a ventriloquist trick and insisted that Puskas leave the
room while they listened again and were finally convinced.

Puskas secured a coveted place for a machine at the Paris Universal
Exhibition. He cunningly chose to leave the machine inert and silent,
without giving visitors the opportunity to hear it. At the same time, he
leased a private hall on the Boulevard des Capucines, where he charged
an admission price for phonograph demonstrations that ran three times
a day, bringing in $200 daily. Edison called this "the sharpest kind of an
advertising dodge," which was high praise. Edison attributed Puskas's
inspired arrangements to ideas Puskas had picked up while in the
United States.

One of Edison's associates on the ground in Paris wrote Charles
Batchelor that the phonograph drew crowds that were overly enthusias
tic and difficult to dislodge. A dispatch from Paris reported, "So we can
only show it once and cover [the machine] up until the crowd gets away
so as to give some one else a chance."

In the newspapers, Edison's own name had become so familiar to

readers that humorists could invoke it without having to provide any
background. Typical was this brief item that appeared in several news
papers in June: "Edison has not invented anything since breakfast. The
doctor has been called." In Menlo Park, Edison could read these items
and smile; they were harmless. But by July, he had passed through the
exhilarating novelty of being well known; now he was weighed down
by an accumulation of irritations. The stream of letters from strangers
was holding steady at about seventy-five or eighty a day, coming from
people whom Edison described as "the deaf, dumb, halt, blind, lame



68 / 

and all sorts of people." This one, with failing eyesight, wanted Edison
to invent a "blindoscope." That one, a phonograph for advertising pur
poses, even though the machines were not being mass produced. Many
wanted only one thing: cash.

His correspondents included new acquaintances who held positions
of power, and they too made requests of him. An example: John Vin
cent, the cofounder of the Chautauqua program based by Chautauqua
Lake, New York, which offered summer programs for families that
combined religious and secular education, invited Edison and his family
to participate. Edison agreed, making plans to stay three weeks in Au
gust and offer a demonstration of what Vincent poetically described as
"all the marvels of electricity which you can evoke and exhibit."

Vincent undoubtedly had no idea what a coup he had scored, obtain
ing atheistic Edison's assent to being cooped up for weeks in a family
oriented church camp far from his lab. Vincent pressed on. He had a
brother, who had a friend, who would like to rent a phonograph-that
is, the machine that had yet to enter production. Could Edison oblige?
And another thing. Vincent suggested-no, he instructed-Edison to
change the name from "phonograph" to "tautophone. " When Edison
politely replied that he thought that "phonograph" was known so
widely that it was probably too late to change, Vincent was unmoved.
He informed Edison he was going to write an article about the machine,
calling it by what he regarded to be its proper name, and expressed the
hope that Edison would correct his patent records accordingly.

Edison's family plans for Chautauqua in August had been arranged
early in the year, when August was distant; then, the correspondence
with the insufferable Vincent followed. By July, Chautauqua in August
was looming. William Croffut was also proving rather pushy, inviting
himself and his wife for an overnight visit at Edison's house. At the lab,
Edison continued to flit from one workbench to another. The work,
such as it was, continued to be interrupted by uninvited visitors and
their expectations that he follow his self-assigned role in the trained
seal-with-phonograph act. Painter urged Edison to close the lab's doors
to visitors entirely and "only show your hand when you are ready for



\69

the market & then its [sic] too late for thieves to get your things." Edi
son had not yet been convinced that he had to abandon the open-door
policy, and letters from Painter were a reminder that the principals in
the Edison Speaking Phonograph Company were waiting impatiently
for the machine that they could sell in volume. At home, Mary Edison
was pregnant with their third child, due in October.

By all the evidence, Edison feit he was being crushed by demands on
him, from strangers, reporters, associates, and family. He responded by
acting on a threat he had made in jest a few months earlier of curing his

"unstrung nerves" by "taking for the woods." He abruptly accepted the
invitation of his biggest admirer in academe, Professor George Barker, to
embark upon a one-month trip to the West. The official purpose of the

trip was to observe a total solar eclipse on 29 July from the best vantage
point, near Rawlins, Wyoming. The eclipse provided unimpeachable jus
tification for why Edison had to embark right then, absenting himself
from lab associates, business partners, and pregnant wife and forcing
cancellation of the Chautauqua trip. At the Wyoming site he could test
his new "tasimeter," a scientific instrument for measuring the tempera
ture of the sun's corona that he had thought up while he was working
hard on not working on the phonograph. It was Barker's inspired idea
that on their way back they could stop in St. Louis and attend the annual
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
where Edison would read a paper that Barker was ghostwriting for him.
It was apparently Edison's idea, however, to extend the trip to California
before turning around for St. Louis and the return.

Edison and Barker left on 13 July, and the timing of his escape was
fortuitous, Edison being absent when, a week later, a new problem
popped up back at the lab. Scientific American, which had taken the
lead in introducing the world to the wonders of the phonograph, con
tinued to do so. The journal told readers, "The Phonograph, truly won
derful as it is, is exceedingly simple and may be made at a slight
expense." It published detailed instructions so that anyone could build
a machine without waiting for Edison and the Edison Speaking Phono
graph Company to finally make good on their promises to the public.



70 / 

Flouting the phonograph's patents presented the Menlo Park lab
with a crisis. In Edison's absence, it was left to Batchelor and Johnson to
decide how to respond. Reflecting their different personalities, Batche
lor's first reaction was to write Edison for instructions, and Johnson's,
to prepare a take-no-prisoners counteroffensive. He prepared a circular
warning of the patents that protected the invention and spelled out
what would happen to anyone foolish enough to infringe.

The manufacture, sale or use, of a patented article without the
consent of the owner of the patent is an infringement, and sub
jects the infringer TO AN ARREST or prohibition from the em
ployment of his machinery, shop, works, or men, in the
production of the article. The infringer is also LIABLE TO BE
MULCTED IN TREBLE THE AMOUNT OF DAMAGES

AWARDED BY THE JURY, TOGETHER WITH THE SUM
TOTAL OF THE COSTS.... Ignorance of the law or of what
the patent covers cannot be pleaded in Court ... the Company
are [sic] satisfied that upon an examination of the law, anyone
desirous of having a Phonograph will find it the cheapest to pro
cure it in a legitimate way.

Johnson also protested to Scientific American's editors, but the jour
nal did not back down. "Investigators have rights as well as patentees,"
a long editorial explained, and among those rights was the one that per
mits making a patented article for one's own tests. Anticipating contem
porary debates about an individual's right to make copies of copyrighted
music or television programs for noncommercial purposes, the editorial

argued that only if a self-assembled phonograph were offered for sale,
depriving the patent holder of his "lawful reward," would the action be
rightfully treated as illegal. With phrasing that could have been lifted
from a blag, Scientific American in 1878 declared, "Unfortunately, the
purchasers of patents are too apt to construe their rights so as to make
them cover pretty much the entire universe."

Meanwhile, Edison had left the phonograph with the rest of his cares



\71

back in Menlo Park. He was determined to see all that could possibly be
seen on his trip, and he secured the very best position to do so, obtain

ing permission to ride at the very front, on top of the locomotive's cow

catcher, with the help of a letter from Jay Gould, with whom he had
developed a relationship years earlier when Gould had used his railroad
interests to gain control of Western Union and Edison was the tele

graphic equipment expert of the day. The train traveled at a top speed
of twenty miles per hour. The only time he felt he was in danger was
when the locomotive hit an animal-Edison thought it may have been a
badger. Upon impact, the animal was thrown up against the locomo
tive, just below the headlight, but Edison at that moment was leaning
on the side, hanging on to an angle brace, and suffered no harm.

Edison's party arrived well in advance of the eclipse, but after the solar
event Edison took a dilatory four weeks to return home. What he enjoyed
most talking about when the journey was complete was not the eclipse
but his adventures as a white tourist in a West whose native inhabitants

were in the process of being violently removed. A visitor to Wyoming in
1878 saw terrain similar to that Custer had seen only two years before
at the Little Bighorn in Montana. After the eclipse, Edison, Barker, some
railroad officials, a U.S. Army major, and some soldiers embarked on a

hunting trip that took them one hundred miles south of the railroad
into Ute country. A few months later, the same major and thirty soldiers
were attacked and killed by Utes near the place Edison had camped, or
such is the story Edison later told.

Edison had left behind Daily Graphic reporter William Croffut, but
he had not shunned the company of reporters entirely. The New York
Herald's Edwin Fox was on hand for the eclipse, and became Edison's
roommate and hunting companion. When the two men went off on
short hunting trips as a twosome, locals spared Edison the worst pranks
directed at tenderfeet from the East, though he was the butt of a mild
ruse when he was fooled into taking some shots at a jackrabbit that
happened to be near a remote rail depot. The rabbit didn't move; he ad
vanced closer, and shot again, with the same result. When he got close

enough to see that the rabbit was dead and had been stuffed, a crowd of



72 / 

onlookers did not hide their amusement. Fox, however, suffered more
when a stationmaster loaned him his "fine Springfield musket" when
Fox had run out of cartridges for his own rifle. Inexperienced, Fox
failed to notice that the musket had been run over by a rail handcar and
was ever-so-slightly bent. Upon firing, the recoil drove the gun against
his shoulder with such force that he had to be treated at a hospital.

Edison did not fully appreciate the reach of the media and the diffu
sion of his own name until late one night, after he and Fox had gone to
sleep in their hotel room in Rawlins. The two were awakened by a loud
knock. In walked a man who introduced himself as "Texas Jack" and
said he had read about Edison in the newspaper and wanted to meet

him. The hotel proprietor appeared and attempted to intercede on be
half of his guests; Texas Jack tossed him into the hallway and resumed
his self-introduction. He had just arrived in town from a hunting trip
and boasted of his marksmanship. To illustrate, he pulled out his Colt,
pointed it through the hotel window, and fired at a weather vane that
sat on top of the town's freight depot. The shot hit its target and awak
ened the townspeople, adding to the commotion. Edison, pleading fa
tigue, tried to coax his new friend to leave, but he did not succeed until
he promised he would see him in the morning.

These and other picturesque encounters provided abundant potential
material for colorful letters if Edison had written home, but he and his
wife did not correspond. Edison kept in touch with his assistants at the
laboratory, but the only time he heard news about his pregnant wife
was when his secretary, Stockton Griffin, wrote him on August 5 with a
report that she was not well.

Mrs. E's health is not of the best-She is extremely nervous and
frets a great deal about you, and about everything-I take it to
be nervous prostration-She was so frightened yesterday for
fear the children would get on the track that she fainted-This

morning I telegraphed Dr. Ward who came at noon.... She
needs a change and right away, as the [train] cars keep her
awake at night and this causes her to lose strength.



\73

Neither Griffin nor the doctor urged Edison to cut his trip short; Griffin
ended his letter with the reassurance that "there's nothing serious in
this," and that is how Edison received it. It would be three more weeks
before he arrived back in Menlo Park.

He and Barker had just finished a three-day visit to San Francisco;
ahead was a tour of Yosemite; a visit to mines in Virginia City, Nevada;
hunting and fishing in Wyoming; and then the appearance at the Amer
ican Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in St. Louis.
Barker formally presented Edison as a new AAAS member, with a soar
ing introduction that asserted theirs was a time when "the practical
man has found science too slow, and has stepped in and discovered for
himself." On that day, Edison was not only feted by the august body of
scientists, he also received word that the Paris Exposition had awarded
the grand prize to the phonograph.

A perceptive newspaper reporter noticed upon Edison's return to
Menlo Park that blurring of boundary separating the private and the
public that we now understand as accompanying the arrival of
celebrity. "The people have come to regard him as public property, and
were almost jealous of the little time he found to give his family," said
the New York Sun. "Little knots of people came and went all day long,
and took possession of him and his office and shop as if they had been
personal property. "

Nothing at all seemed to bother Edison, however. He was tanned,
positively exuded health, and beamed when interviewed. His trip had
been "bang-up": "It was bully. I never saw such a country in all my life.
That's the place to go to. What with following trails, and tumbling
down precipices, and riding over alkali deserts and keeping cool at 125
degrees in the shade, a person couldn't help enjoying himself." His
freshly obtained imperturbability was put to the test by yet another
stack of begging letters. But even when he read a letter from an inventor
who claimed to have invented a "fluid resistance neutralizer" and a

"gravimotor" and asked for $1,000 ("It shall be returned to you by
God, through me, more than a thousand fold and that shortly. You will
greatly oblige, for I have a family. Yours In Christ ... "), he simply



74 / 

handed it to a reporter and said, meditatively, "There could be an awful
good story made out of the letters I get."

During his first interview after his return, with the New York World,
Edison, the raconteur, told an entertaining story about his encounter
out west with a pony that resisted his directions. The next beat, he be
came Edison, the absentminded scientist, falling silent as he became en
grossed in a journal that was on his desk. When his daughter wandered
in, "he looked at her for a moment as if trying to recollect who she was
and then exclaiming, 'Why, Dot, is that you?'" She had just returned
from vacation herself and this was the first time father and daughter
were reunited. After kissing her a half dozen times, he slid her from his
knee and returned to his reading.

If his riding on the train's cowcatcher was a metaphor for his desire
to see opportunities before others, Edison had been successful. He re
turned with lots of dazzling ideas for new investigations into fields
wholly new to him. He spoke confidently of using electricity to evaluate
the value of ore deposits, of applying cottonseed oil to the walls of un
derground mines to control moisture problems, of devising ways to re
duce the teeth-rattling noise of New York's elevated railway. The blind
would benefit from his discovery of an ink that produced raised letters,
and the partially deaf from that ear trumpet he had been promising for
a while (and whose completion date he candidly said he could not even
guess).

His experience on the trip had sharpened his creative faculties, but he
had never suffered a lack of promising ideas. His principal problem
prior to the trip had been his inability to remain focused on completing
the phonograph, the single most promising invention he had ever de
vised. Now, after the trip, his mind was agog with new projects of
which he spoke enthusiastically. He gave no indication that he had de
veloped during his trip to the West an ability to designate some projects
as more important than others, and the phonograph as the most impor
tant of all.

In retrospect, the most interesting aspect of the interviews that fol
lowed Edison's return to Menlo Park was the deliberate way he misled



\75

the reporters about his plans. "Did you get any new ideas out there,
Mr. Edison?" the New York World asked. "No. That's not a place for
ideas," Edison replied. "It's perfectly barren." The West offered splen
did country for a summer vacation, he said, further deflecting attention
from inspiration for a new project that he did not want to disclose. He

spoke of the barrenness of the West on August 27, the day after he had
returned. It was also the very day he, along with Batchelor and Kruesi,
signed and dated a page in a laboratory notebook containing three
sketches. They were labeled "Electric Light."



CHAPTER FOUR



AUCUST i878-0CTOBER 1879

EDISON'S
INVENTION OF the electric light is as embedded in na

tional mythology as Columbus's discovery of America. The in
vention of the one and the discovery of the other are also similar

in that they indisputably occurred, but their mythic significance re
quires ignoring preceding history in both cases.

When Edison in 1878 began to look in to 'inventing" electric light,
Europeans had a seventy-year lead. In 1808, Humphry Davy in
England had employed a large battery to demonstrate for the Royal So
ciety how light could be produced with electricity in either of two ways:
by inducing a strong current to leap across a gap, which created a bright
arc, or by heating an element until it glowed white-hot-incandescent.
Arc light proved to be the easiest to render into practical form. An ex
perimental installation on the streets of Lyon, France, in 1855, dazzled
pedestrians who, at nine in the evening, were bathed in what a local
newspaper called "a flood of light that was as bright as the sun." Birds
were confused and began singing; ladies opened up umbrellas to shield
themselves.

Creating bright light was accomplished relatively easily. What was
difficult was moderating the intensity. First used in lighthouses, then
mounted on high lampposts on the streets of European cities, the arc
light was powerful, but it lacked a dimmer switch. Genealogically, the
arc light was much more closely related to the modern arc welder than
it is to the household lightbulb. Nineteenth-century passersby did not

76



GETTING AHEAO\77

have welder's masks to protect their eyes, leading Robert Louis Steven
son to write: "A new sort of urban star now shines out nightly, horrible,
unearthly, obnoxious to the human eye; a lamp for a nightmare!"

Stevenson's was a minority opinion. For most people, the "artificial
sun" provided by arc lights at night was welcomed. In the early years,
however, they required frequent maintenance while in use. The lights
used two carbon rods placed vertically, one above, one below, whose
tips were kept at a set small distance apart in order to achieve the arc.
As the carbons burned away, however, adjustment was needed in order
to maintain a constant distance. Automatic regulating mechanisms that
eliminated the need for maintenance men to make the rounds were

tried, but their complexity and unreliability introduced new problems.
When an inventor came up with an ingeniously simple, reliable elec

tromagnetic device that kept the gap between the rods at a fixed dis
tance while they burned two inches an hour, arc lighting was no longer
a high-maintenance proposition. That inventor was Charles Brush, and
he would become a very wealthy man. In April 1878-when Thomas
Edison was still touting his yet-to-be-completed phonograph and
months before he had gone west and returned thinking about the elec
tric light-Brush was shipping arc lighting equipment to paying cus
tomers who were installing his lights indoors, as well as out. His lights
were also garnering flattering attention from the press. The New York
Times described a demonstration that Brush set up in a manufacturer's

space in his hometown of Cleveland providing" a pure white light" that
was "unexpectedly soft and endurable to the eyes." This latter descrip
tion is not credible, however. For the demonstration, each of two floors
had been provided with two three-thousand-candlepower lamps-the
gas jets that they replaced were only ten to twenty candlepowers each
so the arc light's sheer candlepower in a confined interior space made
another description in the same article more accurate: "the effect was
most brilliant." Needless to say, the bulk of Brush's sales would be for

street lighting.
Incandescent lighting, the other possible form of electric light that

Davy had shown to the Royal Society, offered a tantalizing prospect of



78 / 

light that truly would be "soft and endurable to the eyes." Since Davy's
day, many fine minds had tried different approaches toward realizing
the potential. Frederick de Moleyns, an Englishman, received a British
patent for an incandescent bulb in 1841, six years before Edison was
born. In addition, an American, J. W. Starr, received patents for two dif
ferent kinds of incandescent bulbs in 1845 and traveled around

England giving exhibitions. He died at the age of twenty-five.
An incandescent bulb required a filament that would glow brightly

without melting. Starr had worked with the two materials that showed
the most promise: carbon and platinum. Carbon did not melt at high
temperatures, but it burned up too easily. Platinum had drawbacks, too:
It was extremely expensive and it was difficult to bring to the point of
incandescence without reaching the slightly higher temperature at
which it melted. In 1878, at least twenty different individuals had tried
to make a practical incandescent bulb, or were still engaged in the
quest, and no one had succeeded in producing a bulb that was ready for
service outside of a laboratory.

Edison had tinkered with both arc and incandescent lighting in the
past, using batteries, and on his trip out west, his traveling companion,
Professor Barker, had called his attention to the potential for unlimited
electrical power from waterfalls, which could be applied to mining, a
field in which Edison was interested. While traveling, Barker had also
urged Edison to visit the workshop of William Wallace, in Ansonia,
Connecticut, to see what Barker himself had seen: a dynamo that Wal
lace had designed with the inventor Moses Farmer and built at his own
foundry, which powered an arc lighting system that Wallace had set up.
Barker offered to make the arrangements for a visit to Connecticut, and
two weeks after returning home, Edison made the trip.

Edison was accompanied by Barker; another professor, Charles
Chandler, of Columbia University; and Edison's chief assistant, Charles
Batchelor. The party included one more member: a reporter for the New

York Sun, whose observant eye captured an Edison who moved sepa
rately from his companions, standing apart due to deafness and person
ality quirks. Barker and Chandler exchanged jokes that Edison could



 \ 79

not hear. Occasionally, Batchelor would repeat a choice anecdote in
Edison's ear, and Edison would laugh appreciatively, and then quickly
lapse into "deep meditation." Edison also expressed a curiously ghoul
ish thought when Wallace showed the group his invention for use in
mining that directed a stream of water with such force that it could tear
flesh from the hand. "Barky," Edison suddenly said to his friend, "if a
person could cut a man's throat with such a stream of water, I don't be

lieve a jury could be found that would convict him of murder."
For Edison, the highlight of the visit was seeing the Wallace-Farmer

dynamo in operation. The inventor fell in love.

Mr. Edison was enraptured. He fairly gloated over it. Then
power was applied ... and eight electric lights were kept ablaze
at one time, and each being equal to 4,000 candles.... This
filled up Mr. Edison's cup of joy. He ran from the instruments to
the lights, and from the lights back to the instrument. He
sprawled over a table with the simplicity of a child, and made
all kinds of calculations.

Everything that Edison said and did on the day of the visit to Ansonia
convinced him that the electric light was easily attainable. This required
a fertile imagination. What he had seen in Connecticut was a powerful
electromagnetic generator, a form of power vastly superior to batter
ies. But it powered four-thousand-candlepower arc lights that lacked a
filament-it did not suggest a way to find a durable filament suitable for

a sixteen-candlepower incandescent lightbulb. Edison thought he saw
the perfect opportunity: others had solved the problem of power, and he
would add a solution for providing a reliable bulb, which he told the
press soon after was "so simple that a bootblack might understand it."

A simple solution should have presented no serious problems to the
great inventor. Once uttered, however, the announcement of a solution
could not be retracted, not when a celebrity has spoken. Edison was not
necessarily more careless about making empty claims than his contem
porary inventors in the electric light field; he simply was more exposed.



80 / 

Many ideas, until practically realized, will seem grandiose; but the in
ventor's own interest in a given idea often disappears as quickly as the
inspiration arrived. Out of public view, these brief enthusiasms cause no
embarrassment.

Before Edison had made members of the press his personal friends,
he was free to think aloud, tryout an idea, and drop it. In 1871, he
recorded his excitement about adapting a new electric motor "so as to
obtain the resquisite [sic] strength and still be of extreme lightness
and combined with suitable air propelling apparatus wings parchoutte
[sic] etc. so as to produce a flying machine of extreme lightness &
tremendous power." On the next page of the notebook, he had returned
to the ongoing work of designing a new telegraphic printer.

By 1878, however, he was the Wizard of Menlo Park, the famous in
ventor of the phonograph, who had willingly given up the privacy that
kept momentary enthusiasms out of public view. Before the invention of
the phonograph, he had shown an underlying streak of vanity in his as
siduous stockpiling of patents in his name. Now, he set a far more ambi
tious goal for himself, confiding that he "wished to produce something
at least as good as the phonograph every year." That the ambition was
shared not with a friend but with a reporter is telling.

"Subdividing" light was how reducing the intensity of arc light was
referred to. If Edison attained it in 1878, following the invention of the
phonograph in 1877, the feat would double his fame and keep him on
pace for achieving technological breakthroughs annually. True, the task
would usurp the work of making the phonograph a practical appliance,
but a past triumph held less interest. He leaped at the opportunity to
move quickly on to another great invention. The electric light was a tan
talizing object for another reason: Unlike the phonograph, which did not
exist before Edison's invention, the incandescent bulb had been pursued
by many of the world's best electrical engineers and resourceful inven
tors. When the self-trained Wizard stepped over the failures of others to
enter what for him would be a new field, using technical knowledge that
bore no relationship to the phonograph, the satisfaction was immense.



\SI

"I don't care so much about making my fortune," Edison said in an in
terview, "as I do for getting ahead of the other fellows."

So great was the anticipated satisfaction that Edison convinced him
self that he had succeeded in the "subdivision of light" within a week.
He had visited Connecticut on Sunday, 8 September 1878. On the fol
lowing Saturday, Edison told the New York Sun that he had only
needed "a few days" to learn how to apply electricity for indoor light
ing. "I have it now!" he claimed, though he was unwilling to provide
specifics, other than to say that "scientific men" had not thought to in
vestigate his approach and "everybody will wonder why they have
never thought of it, it is so simple."

Edison had also somehow found time to conceive of a detailed vision

of how he would first install his "light centers" in Lower Manhattan,
connecting central power stations with individual businesses and
houses by running insulated wires underground like gas pipes and con
verting the gas burners and chandeliers that were already in use into
lightbulb receptacles. The same wires could also provide power for ele
vators, sewing machines, and stoves. Not as prescient were his cost esti
mates; he thought his electric lights would be one-tenth the cost of gas.
Furthest off was his one-word prediction of when he would provide a
public exhibition: "Soon."

In his private correspondence, Edison spoke in the same giddy fash
ion, blurring the distinction between what he hoped for and what he
had achieved. He wrote Theodore Puskas in Europe, "Have struck a
bonanza in Electric Light." Prospective investors quickly approached
Edison, relying upon the successful entrepreneur's past record to project
new triumphs with still-to-be-proven technology. Several Western
Union directors were keen to form a new company around Edison, and
the company's attorney, Grosvenor Lowrey, served first as intermediary,
and then as Edison's trusted adviser.

Lowrey quickly learned how difficult it was to persuade Edison to
disrupt his routine at the laboratory, even for the purpose of gaining fi
nancing. When Edison missed a meeting that Lowrey had set up in New



82 / 

York City with interested investors, Edison's secretary explained that
Edison had worked all through the night and the morning, breaking off
only at ten o'clock-and forgot the meeting. When Lowrey tried again
to make arrangements, Edison wrote him, "If I come to New York I lose
the day-time valuable on light please come out."

What Edison did not explain to the investors knocking at his door
was that he had run into some serious difficulties. The approach that he
had initially proclaimed to be "so simple" was complex in the extreme:
He was attempting to use platinum as the filament and was devising
regulators to automatically break the circuit when the temperature
edged too close to the melting point. This had been tried by many in
ventors before Edison, and he had discovered for himself how elusive
was a design that actually worked. Drawing on his experience with
multiplex telegraphic equipment, he came up with various complex
combinations of electromagnets, switches, and levers to regulate the
temperature of the filament, to no avail. He had not yet succeeded in

building a single light whose platinum filament could remain intact for
more than a few minutes. Eventually, Edison was forced to abandon al
together his attempt to regula te the temperature.

In October 1878, when corresponding with his most trusted associ
ates, he began to rein in his optimistic predictions a little bit. He cabled
George Gouraud in London: "I have only correct principle. Requires
six months to work up details." At this point, he could have begun tem
pering the public's expectations, too, which he had stoked by his prema
ture "I have it" announcement a few weeks earlier. Having experienced
the thrill of power from his celebrity-Gouraud told Edison of a "panic
in gas shares" in London when word was received of Edison's an

nouncement of success-Edison could not bring himself to concede
publicly that he had been too hasty in his claims.

Gouraud sent Edison a continuous flow of reports from Europe that
would have stimulated the imagination of any inventor, even one with
out a weakness for the grandiose. Gouraud wished he "had had my wits
about me" when he had first received word of Edison's invention of a

new approach to the electric light: "I might have made you a clean mil-



GETTING AHEAC\83

lion as it played the very devil with stocks all over the country." The
British equivalent of $1.36 billion was "trembling in the balance,"
Gouraud wrote in another letter, while British scientists tried to deter
mine whether Edison's "alleged" discovery was genuine. Gouraud urged
Edison to form an electric light company in England, without delay, to
take advantage of "universal free advertising such as cannot be bought
for money under any circumstances.

"

In the excitement of the moment, Edison was unable to remain quiet.
He once again invited members of the press to his laboratory, one by
one, not to bring them up to date on the technical difficulties that he
and his staff had encountered, but to quell any doubts that his an
nounced success was complete. When the New York Herald arrived,
Edison had a demonstration set up, showing a bulb that was lit for
three minutes, not long enough to expose the short life of Edison's plat
inum filaments. The reporter was impressed. When arc lights were the
principal competition, Edison's incandescent bulb drew praise simply
because "it did not pain the eye."

Running the sham demonstration for the representative of a second

newspaper, Edison flipped a switch, and he and the reporter waited
while the filament began to glow and finally reached incandescence. Sit
ting in front of the bulb that would burn out in a couple of minutes
were he to leave it on beyond the brief demonstration, Edison was
asked, "How long will it last?" He answered, "Forever, almost."

When the reporter from a third newspaper paid a visit for the same
demonstration, Edison was asked point-blank if he had yet encountered
any difficulties. "Well, no," he replied with a straight face, and then
claimed that the very absence of setbacks was "what worries me." For an

other newspaper, he asked the public to be patient-not for the perfection
of the "subdivided" electric light, which was complete, but for his phono
graph, which he granted was viewed by many as a toy of little practical
use. He was making daily improvements, he claimed, and it would even
tually take its place "in the niche of public utility in good time."

Little attention was spared for readying the phonograph for the mass
market, however. The time sheets from his laboratory for this period



84 / 

show that five staff members devoted about sixty hours to the dictating
phonograph in October 1878, an insufficient investment to produce an
affordable model that would supplement the expensive model sold to
commercial exhibitors. The exhibition model's best month had been in

May, when it sold forty-six units; in July, the number had dropped to
three; in September, it had recovered slightly, to reach the lofty level of
sixteen units, netting Edison a commission of $461. The treasurer of the
Edison Speaking Phonograph Company told him that these paltry sales
would soon disappear altogether and that he looked forward to the in
troduction of a "'Standard machine' which I understand you are per

fecting." But even the minimal ongoing work on the phonograph would
be pushed aside by the launch of frenzied efforts to find a way to fulfill
Edison's premature public claim that his electric light was working. A
couple of months later, when asked in an interview about the state of
his phonograph, Edison replied tartly, "Comatose for the time being."
He changed metaphors and continued, catching hold of an image that
would be quoted many times by later biographers: "It is a child and will
grow to be a man yet; but I have a bigger thing in hand and must finish
it to the temporary neglect of all phones and graphs."

Financial considerations played a part in allocation of time and re
sources, too. Commissions from the phonograph that brought in hun
dreds of dollars were hardly worth accounting for, not when William
Vanderbilt and his friends were about to advance Edison $50,000 for
the electric light. Edison wrote a correspondent that he regarded the fi
nancier's interest especially satisfying as Vanderbilt was "the largest gas
stock owner in America."

In mid-October, the American Gas-light Association, the industry's
principal trade group, met in New York and took stock of the threat
posed by the claims issuing from Edison's laboratory in Menlo Park.
Gaslight monopolies had few friends outside of the ranks of sharehold
ers. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, gaslight had been
viewed as pure and clean; seventy years later, its shortcomings had be
come all too familiar: it was dirty, soiled interior furnishings, and emit-



GETTING AHEAO\85

ted unhygienic fumes. It was also expensive, affordable for indoor light
ing only in the homes of the wealthy, department stores, or government
buildings. The New York Times almost spat out the following descrip
tion of how gas companies conducted business: "They practically made
the bills what they pleased, for although they read off the quantity by
the meter, that instrument was their own, and they could be made to tell
a lie of any magnitude.... Everybody has always hated them with a
righteous hatred."

Edison credited the gas monopoly for providing his original motiva
tion to experiment with electric light years before in his Newark labora
tory. Recalling in October 1878 his unpleasant dealings years earlier
with the local gas utility, which had threatened to tear out their meter
and cut off the gas, Edison said, "When I remember how the gas com

panies used to treat me, I must say that it gives me great pleasure to get
square with them." The Brooklyn Daily Eagle printed an editorial titled
"Revenge Is Sweet" in which it observed that the general public greatly
enjoyed the discomfort of the gas companies, too: "To see them squirm
and writhe is a public satisfaction that lifts Edison to a higher plane
than that of the wonderful inventor and causes him to be regarded as a
benefactor of the human race, the leading deity of popular idolatry."

The gas interests had been dealt a number of recent setbacks even be

fore Edison's announcement of a newly successful variant of electric light.
An "enormous abandonment of gas" by retail stores in cities, who now
could use less expensive kerosene, was noticed. The shift was attributed
not to stores' preference for kerosene but as a means of escaping "the
arrogance of the gas companies." Arc lights had now become a newly
competitive threat, too. The previous month, Charles Brush had set up
his lights in an exhibition hall in New York and then added a display in
Boston. Sales to stores followed in several cities; then, as word spread,
other establishments sought to obtain the cachet bestowed by the latest
technology. William Sharon, a U.S. senator for and energetic booster
of California, retrofitted the public spaces of his Palace Hotel in San
Francisco with arc lights that replaced 1,085 gas jets. The gas-industry



86 / 

conventioneers preferred to talk about the failed installations of arc
lights, such as in textile factories, in which the dark shadows cast by the
light made it difficult for loom operators to distinguish threads.

Speakers at the gas-industry convention explained that Edison's light
did not pose the potent competitive threat to gas that had been de
scribed in the press. (Edison had sent Charles Batchelor to attend and

enjoyed hearing Batchelor's account that showed "they talked in the
dark. ") While the popular image of Edison was of a wonderful man
who "could accomplish almost anything he undertook," sober scientific
authorities were shaking their heads doubtfully about Edison's claims
of success.

One independent observer, Albert Salomon von Rothschild, in Vi
enna, had had his interest piqued, and he wrote an American colleague
for an impartial assessment of whether Edison's invention would "allow
electric light to be henceforth employed everywhere just as gas-light,
and not only in very large rooms or places, as is now the case [with arc
lights]." Rothschild made clear that he had never joined the cult that
idolized Edison, whose most recent inventions, including the phono
graph, "however interesting, have finally proved to be only trifles." Still,
he did see that if Edison's technical claims were to prove valid, the busi
ness implications could not be overstated.

Edison did not publicly divulge the details of his electric light experi
ments, of course, so no external authorities could know for certain that

his attempts to devise a lasting filament-which he was trying to do
with platinum and thermal regulators-were as ill-fated as those of his
many predecessors. He blamed his reticence about the electric light on
his past experience with the phonograph. The premature publication of
technical details in Scientific American had been translated, via French,
into German, causing endless difficulties with foreign patents. He had a
letter from Lemuel Serrell, one of his attorneys, to show to a skeptical
reporter, in which Serrell lectured Edison, "The confounded newspaper
men are doing you more harm and producing more trouble than they
are worth. "

Not so easily put off was his friend and supporter, Professor George



 \87

Barker. As the person who had encouraged Edison during their shared
trek out west to revisit the project of developing incandescent light,
Barker had been thanked with a promise of six working sets of bulbs
when Edison thought he had easily found a simple, but complete, solu
tion in platinum. Relying on Edison's word, Barker had announced he
would present a public lecture on the state of the art of electric light,
complete with a demonstration. The newspapers carried the announce
ment, and Edison had promised to leave his laboratory for the occasion
and make an appearance himself. Only after Barker had set about mak
ing arrangements did Edison realize how woefully unready he was to
unveil his short-lived platinum bulbs. First, he begged off from making
the trip himself, and then he told Barker that though he personally
wanted very much to provide lights for the demonstration, he could not
because the directors of the new Edison Electric Light Company would
not allow him to do so.

Barker was astonished and angry in equal measure. He did not know
that the company that Edison invoked as the villainous party in the

matter had not yet signed an agreement with Edison. The prospective
investors apparently had been told little about Edison's setbacks in his
electric light research, and Edison understandably was not eager to
make a public display of his yet-to-be-reversed failure in the laboratory.
"Positively No Admittance" was now posted at the front door of the
laboratory. "What is that inhospitable sign for?" a reporter asked
Charles Batchelor, who gallantly took responsibility for the change of
policy. Edison "doesn't want to bar anybody out, so he lets all sorts of
inquisitive people come here and occupy his time." Batchelor said he
and the other assistants had prevailed upon him to keep the curious out.
Closing the front door also served to restrict the outflow of informa
tion' too, in this delicate time of arranging financing.

Professor Barker would not be denied without a protest, however. If

Edison would honor his promises for the lecture, Barker would go to
New York and personally ask individual company directors to give per
mission. The thought of giving a lecture on the electric light without
having one of the Edison lights that had been advertised would put him



88 / 

in a position in which "I would rather lose my right hand than occupy."
In the event, he did not have an Edison bulb for a demonstration in his

survey of the state of the art, but Charles Brush's company also failed to

show. It had asked for, and secured, a place in Barker's program, then
the company had suddenly begged off only twenty-four hours in ad
vance. Barker forgave Edison for his breach of promise, and publicly
covered for him at the demonstration by saying that Edison's London
attorney had advised against a public showing quite yet. Afterward, he
privately indulged with Edison in the pleasure of knocking Edison's arc
light rival ("not always fair in their statements or scrupulous in their
dealings" ) .

At the same time that Edison was careful not to let outsiders see the

true state of his electric light research, he continued to accept cheerfully
individual requests for interviews from the major newspapers. He con

veyed complete confidence in his still-secret solution, and charmed re
porters with his disdain for conventional formality. The press was
fascinated with Edison's fondness for chewing tobacco-the Professor
tore into a "yellow cake as large as a dinner plate" while being inter
viewed by the New York Sun, as he talked on without end about the ad
vantages of indoor electric light and the imminent test of lights in every
home in Menlo Park in order to "keep the bugs out of the invention."

Talking at such length in the New York Sun was hurtful to Edison's
public image, advised another reporter-friend, Edwin Fox, who wrote
Edison with unsolicited advice about proper management of Edison's

celebrity. "Keep yourself aloof and reserved," Fox said, like the ex
tremely reserved, and much-loved, General Ulysses S. Grant (Fox had
no way of knowing in 1878 that Grant, pressed by financial need,
would drop his reserve at the end of his life and write two volumes of
bestselling memoirs, published in 1885-1886). In Fox's not unbiased
view, the image of Edison that came through in the competitor's inter
view was abhorrent. "Holding you out to the world as a chewer of to
bacco and all such trash ... is really too bad." For his own reporting,
Fox said he had always "sought to keep you on a high pedestal."

Days after he wrote this, however, Fox sought intimate access to Edi-



GETTING AHEAO\89

son and the laboratory, so that he could write about everything: "how
you act, talk, live, work, and look-the struggles and obstacles attend
ing the completion of your chief inventions." Showing a sure, and strik
ingly modern, understanding of the popular appeal of fly-on-the-wall
journalism, Fox said he planned to spend at least a week living in
Menlo Park, dropping into the laboratory "when the spirit moves" to
fill his notebook with "fresh crisp data." This was the only way to do
justice to his subject, did not Edison agree, "my esteemed manipulator
of the fiery lightning"? Fox's flattery is not especially noteworthy; not
just Edison, but his wife and children, too, received uncommon compli
ments on a daily basis. A speed record in sycophancy was established
when a story in late October reporting the birth of the Edisons' third
child, William, credited the newborn with "indications of precocity"
and "intellectual independence" because he had kicked mightily as he
was dressed for the first time.

Members of the press, academics, investors-everyone made their
own individual appeal for access to Edison. At the same time, he had
nothing to show them that would withstand scrutiny. Edison's position
must have been uncomfortable, and all the more so because he had no
close friend in whom he could confide. Stress may have played at least
some role in a severe attack of neuralgia that kept him in bed on 23 Oc
tober. Without being privy to a complete view of Edison's predicament,
Barker ascribed the attack to overindulgence in work. "Be regular
about your meals and sleeping hours," the amateur doctor advised, "or
some day you will break down entirely." Edison had a different theory
about the cause of his malady: on seven successive nights he had looked
too long into arc lights that he had set up. "I think electricity burned
me," he said. "I shall not repeat that trick." When he recovered, he
wore a floppy black sombrero in the lab for protection.

In the eyes of an entirely neutral party, the credit-reporting agency of
R. G. Dun & Company, Edison was seen as "an untiring genius apt to
run from one effort at invention to another without fully completing
the work he is on." His world renown was acknowledged; so, too, was
a history of commercial disappointments: "the financial fruits seem to



90 / 

be mainly plucked by other hands." The report summed up rather
nicely Edison's reputation and prospects:

Now claims to have solved the problem of furnishing cheap
Electric light to dwellings & places where multitudes of single
lights are required at less cost than gas. His claim is not yet
demonstrated to be good, but if he is successful this time his
ability to pay need not be questioned. He is reported to be a
thoroughly honorable steady & industrious man. He must have
some means but probably all his ready money is continually
being planted in the expenses of his experimenting. It is impos
sible to Estimate his worth, or in fact to say that he has a class of
assets valuable as a basis for credit.

Edison was not much interested in what a credit-reporting agency
had to say about him, as he was not interested in obtaining commercial
loans. When R. G. Dun wrote him a few years later for information

about one of his companies, he scrawled some basic information in the

margin as his reply, closing with "hope nobody will ever give us any
credit." What he sought were passive investors who would provide his
laboratory with the funds necessary to make good on the breakthrough
he had thought he had obtained in early September. He left negotiations
to Grosvenor Lowrey, saying he did not care about the details, he sim

ply needed money to "push the light rapidly." In fact, he was in no posi
tion to do anything rapidly with the electric light; he first needed the
money to make his incandescent filament durable.

Lowrey, in turn, told the senior executives at Western Union; Drexel,
Morgan & Company; and his fellow law partners, all of whom wished
to invest in Edison's electric light venture, that "all serious difficulties
have been overcome." Lowrey knew just what to say to bring investors
on board, letting them know that some refinement was still needed, but
not letting them know so much that they were scared off. On 15 No
vember, the newly formed Edison Electric Light Company gave Edison
an advance royalty payment of $30,000, of which $25,000 was to go



 \91

for work at the laboratory for "further necessary investigations and ex
periments" related to the light.

A few days later, some members of the company's executive commit
tee paid a visit to Menlo Park, and Lowrey did his best to convince Edi
son that such visits were helpful in making their expectations of
progress more realistic. "It is all the better that they should see the rub
bish and rejected devices of one sort and another," Lowrey wrote Edi
son. When other company directors made another visit, Lowrey again
labored to convince Edison that it was good that the backers had had
"their imaginations somewhat tempered." He wrote Edison: "They re
alize now that you are doing a man's work upon a great problem and
they think you have got the jug by the handle with a reasonable proba
bility of carrying it safely to the well and bringing it back full."

In a matter of just a few weeks, Edison had spent $19,000 of the
$25,000 advance on a new laboratory building. When directors showed
up at Menlo Park when the move was in progress, and Edison himself

was not present to offer reassurance that all was well, the visitors saw

"general dilapidation, ruin and havoc." Lowrey met with the executive
committee and shared with them what he later described to Edison as a

"very good natured laugh over their disappointment at their visit." Edi
son was fortunate that the committee members were so willing to tamp
down their rising concern.

While Lowrey undertook the education of the company's trustees,
Edison continued to release little puff balls of news and anecdotes for
the general public that were meaningless at best and outright mislead
ing at worst. In his telling, work at the laboratory was going so well
that he could not do anything, even clumsily dropping a tool, without
improving his electric lightbulb. He claimed he had doubled the inten
sity of light in one of his platinum filaments after a screwdriver was ac
cidentally dropped and bent it. From now on, he declared, he would
make all of his filaments in the same misshapen form. Edison packaged
this and other entertaining partial disclosures as if he were being candid
to the point of being imprudent. "I have begun by taking the public
into my confidence," he told the public in December 1878, "and I don't



92 / 

propose to keep from them anything I know, or propose to do, if I can
help it."

One blemish-free story was fed to the press for the public; another,
more candid version went to the investors; and an uncensored version
was provided only to his most senior, trusted employees. There were no
financial conflicts-of-interest regulations in Edison's era. In January
1879, when the Edison Electric Light Company issued 500 shares, there
were only ten shareholders. One was Edison, who received 219 shares;
but, significantly, one was Edwin Fox, of the New York Herald, and an
other was William Croffut, of the New York Daily Graphic, who re
ceived 8 and 5 shares respectively as gifts from Edison. Not having
heard acknowledgment that Croffut had received his shares, Edison
sent a follow-up note and received the following effusive reply:

My Dear Edison,
Yes! Bless you, yes, of course I got the five shares of stock and

have been commercially ecstatic ever since. You are a brick. If I
can do anything in the world for you at any time, order me up
& I'll go it alone.

The thank-you note that Fox sent to Edison treated the gift as recogni
tion of past services rendered (it made Fox "truly sensible of the pleas
ing fact that my friendship is not unappreciated"), but he, too, served
up fulsome flattery, closing with the wish that Edison continue in his
"triumphal march to undying fame."

Edison misled the general public, and, in more sophisticated fashion,
the outside investors of the Edison Electric Light Company, not to effect
a stock swindle but to buy precious time so that he could work his way
out of the corner his premature boasts had backed him into. He did not

confide to a diary or in letters how the discouraging results in the labo
ratory little resembled the daily miracles he publicly claimed or hinted
at. But the mood in the lab is chronicled in the letters written home by



GETTING AHEAO\93

one of Edison's new hires, Francis Upton, a twenty-six-year-old physi
cist from Peabody, Massachusetts. Upton came from a background of
privilege and formal academic training, different from Edison's in every
imaginable way. He had studied at Bowdoin College, in Maine, then at
Princeton, and had done postgraduate work under Hermann von
Helmholtz at Berlin University in Germany. Before being invited to
Menlo Park, he had been a temporary subcontractor doing a patent
search for Edison in the Astor Library in New York City. In November
1878, Edison offered him a permanent position, which Upton accepted
without even knowing what he would be paid. Excited about the
prospect of having his first real job, he wrote his father, "I cannot really
believe that I am earning money."

Upon arrival in Menlo Park, Upton was brought into Edison's inner
circle, even as he was referred to by some colleagues as "the mathemati
cian" rather than by name. Edison, Batchelor, Upton, and three other
assistants worked from 7:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.-a schedule necessitated

by the well-intentioned visitors who made work during the day impos
sible. Edison complained that they would appear as a line of heads com
ing up the hill in the morning, "devour" his time, and then "pay for it
with expressions of admiration." When a tornado and fierce rain hit the
area in early December, Edison and his staff were glad for the storm, as
it kept the curious away for a day.

Upton arrived just at the moment when Edison was coming to the re
alization that he and his staff would never be able to make a durable

electric light based on platinum. This conclusion, accepted most reluc
tantly, meant starting over. Alternative filament materials, which could
reach incandescence without soon melting, all shared a similar vexing
attribute: In the presence of oxygen, they oxidized, ruining the light. To
prevent this, they had to be placed in a high vacuum that was difficult to
achieve even with the best technology available at the time. It was the
troublesome vacuum that Edison had thought he could avoid when he
had rashly seized upon platinum as the "simple" solution.

Contrary to his published avowal that he would be perfectly candid
with the public about the progress on the electric light, Edison did not



94 / 

tell reporters that he had hit a dead end. Even when he decided to tell

the Edison Electric Light investors in late January, he had Stockton
Griffin, his secretary, go into New York to deliver the news. Edison had
no patience for attending personally to the care and feeding of his back
ers; that was for minions like Griffin or his attorney, Grosvenor Lowrey,
to take care of. The most striking thing about how the investors re
ceived the news was their meekness-no one demanded that Edison ap

pear to explain his failure to secure the first principles for a working
incandescent bulb. On 25 January 1879, when Lowrey visited the of
fices of Fabbri & Chauncey on the same day that Griffin had come and
gone delivering the news that Edison had been forced to abandon the
platinum filament, the Edison Electric shareholders gathered around
Lowrey and jokingly asked him if he knew anybody who would want to
buy their shares. Lowrey did what he was supposed to do, dispensing
homilies as Edison himself did, saying that doubt and tribulation ac

companied any great accomplishment, and "this was just the time when
we must all stand by the inventor."

The investors did stand by the inventor, which was important to
young Francis Upton, who, like any new hire at a start-up that was in
trouble, spent much time wondering if he had made a mistake. In late
February, Upton, reasoned, "I am learning a great deal and nothing will
be likely to take that from me," even if the venture ran aground. At
times like early March 1879, when Upton wrote his family marveling
that he was actually paid $12 a week for labor that "does not seem like
work but like study and I enjoy it," he seemed younger than his twenty
six years. A few weeks later, however, he had worked up the courage to
ask Edison for a raise. Edison ruled that out, but offered to provide him
with the fees Edison would receive for publishing magazine articles if
Upton would serve as the ghostwriter who would "dress his thoughts
for the press." Flattered, Upton accepted the offer.

In May, when Upton was visiting his home in Peabody, he heard
about a mill owner in Lawrence who was unhappy about paying
$30,000 a month for gas lighting and interested in trying Edison's light
in his mill. He wrote Edison excitedly, offering to investigate the oppor-



\95

tunity, and doing the arithmetic for his employer: "Three or four hun
dred thousand dollars a year are not to be sneezed at." Inexperience
with the world of business must have contributed to Upton's failure to
see that he was working with the wrong numbers. The mill owner paid
the gas company $30,000 yearly, not monthly, Upton sheepishly had to
inform Edison.

Upton's value was revealed not in business development but in the
experimental work in the laboratory. In early June 1879, Edison offered
to provide his young assistant a 5 percent share of equity in the Edison
Electric Light Company. Edison made his offer to his protg on an ei
ther/or basis: salary or equity, not both. At the time, Upton had not yet
married and was childless, but he knew his financial obligations would
soon become considerable. He was engaged and would be married later
that summer when his fiance returned from travels in Europe. He
could see that the electric light was "far from perfection," and there
was no way of predicting when it would ever be ready for commercial
introduction. Edison had difficulty letting go of his original design
based on platinum, which served only to delay the inevitable day when
all of his focus could be trained on alternatives.

In writing about his quandary to his father, Upton preserves the jumble
of conflicting feelings he had at that moment. On the one hand, he won
dered if he should ask Edison for 7.5 percent of the company instead of

5 percent, as Edison was anything but stingy when making such alloca
tions. On the other hand, it was generous of Edison to have offered 5

percent, without requiring any contribution from Upton other than for

going wages of $600 a year. Upton wrote, "I think it is not becoming in
me to try and jew him."

Upton's father urged him to choose the salary, but Upton elected in
July 1879 to take the offer of a 5 percent share of the company. He rea
soned that a salary was ultimately dependent on the success of the elec
tric light anyway, so he might as well select the option that provided the
largest potential gains. He immediately felt a freedom as "master of my
own time," free to come and go as he pleased, confident that Edison
trusted him that "I should know what is best." As time passed, however,



96 / 

uncertainty about Edison Electric's prospects grew. On 19 October, he
wrote home, "The electric light goes on very slowly." It was impossible
not to think about the fact that if it were to succeed, "the money will
come in enormous amounts." But if the efforts were to end in failure,
Upton said he would be "contented with the experience I shall have,
though of course very much disappointed at not having the money."

He did not foresee that the very day he was drawing up this somber
assessment, Sunday, 21 October 1879, his laboratory colleague Charles
Batchelor spent ten hours evacuating the air in a bulb with an untested

filament, a carbonized sewing thread. That night, the bulb was placed
on a test stand and the power was switched on. The bulb burned on and

on, passing the twenty-four-hour mark. Bets were laid down, and the
round-the-clock vigil continued for a second night. It stayed on into the
afternoon of Tuesday, having performed admirably for more than forty
hours, when Edison decided to end the endurance test under normal
conditions and increased the voltage until the bulb turned into a ball of
dazzling white, and then-pop-burned out.

In retrospect, those forty hours would be looked upon with fondness
as the first successful test of a durable incandescent filament, a break

through, but the laboratory records at the time show a laconic reaction.
Batchelor wrote without affect that "we made some very interesting ex

periments with cotton thread," but he was also testing at the same time

fishing line, paper, cardboard, and other materials. We might guess that
Edison's premature declaration of success with platinum the year before
made everyone at the laboratory wary of committing the same mistake
agam.

Edison could not trumpet the promising results in public because he
had maintained all along that the necessary technical innovation had
been accomplished in short order at the beginning of the initiative. He
did tell the New York Times in a story published on 21 October 1879
that "the electric light is perfected," allowing that unspecified problems
"which have been puzzling me" had now been solved. Francis Upton
had already learned, however, that Edison used "perfect" as verb or ad
jective without regard for conventional definitions, and it was best not



GETTING AHEAO\97

to be carried along by his optimism. Upton discounted Edison's claim
that the Edison Electric Light Company stock was now worth a thou
sand dollars a share. "He is always sanguine," Upton wrote his father
about Edison, "and his valuations are on his hopes more than on his re
alities." A couple of weeks after seeing the cotton-thread bulb burn
steadily, Upton's spirits had fallen again. "Continual trouble" contin
ued to dim the electric light's prospects, as "we cannot make what we
want." He acknowledged, and mocked, his own disappointment when
it appeared that he and his fellow experimenters would never "see the
untold millions roll in upon Menlo Park that my hopes want to see."

And then, in mid-November, the work in the laboratory produced
new excitement, when carbonized paper, bent into the shape of a horse
shoe, was tested as a filament and proved more durable than the cotton
thread had. Finally, Upton said, "we now know we have something."
He could not yet say whether the economics of electric light would
make it competitive against gaslight, but at least the laboratory had a
working prototype. By the end of November, private trading of shares
of the Edison Electric Light Company had sent the price upward to ver
tiginous heights. No one associated with Edison's laboratory then fore
saw that commercial introduction of the electric light would still be
three long years away. Upton, however, did not have to wait to enjoy
pointing out that Father had not known best, that in giving up less than
$300 in wages at that point, Upton's shares were already worth more
than $10,000. He told his father, "I cannot help laughing when 1 think
how timid you were at home." Already forgotten were his own doubts
about the venture that had left him depressed only a few days before.



CHAPTER FIVE



DECEMBER 1879-JANUARY 1881

NEWSPAPERS
AND MAGAZINES had made Edison famous with

portraits created with words, not cameras. Were Edison to
leave his laboratory for a rare trip to New York City, he could

do so without attracting attention to himself. Occasionally, on a Satur
day night, Edison would go into the city with Francis Jehl, a young assis
tant, taking in lowbrow theater, or a boxing match, or a streetside
phrenological exam. As the two strolled at leisure, taking in the sights of
card hustlers, street vendors, and quack doctors, Edison "enjoyed being
incognito," Jehl recalled in his memoirs. It is indeed remarkable that Edi
son could move in public with such ease, at the very time that one New
York paper asserted that the general public discussed at greater length
the probable life span of Edison than most anyone else in the world,
"outside the crowned heads." Edison was in possession of "more inven
tions than any man living," and was all of thirty-two years old.

When Edison announced the perfection of his electric light, one fan
expressed a wish to meet the great man and got her wish. But then,
Sarah Bernhardt always got her wish. Bernhardt, a French actress and
singer, enjoyed a movie star's celebrity decades before movies were in
vented (and when they did arrive, Bernhardt became the medium's first
star). In December 1879, as she completed a run of stage performances
in New York, Bernhardt was only thirty-five and, like Edison, a prodigy
in her profession. But having made her acting debut at the age of eigh
teen, she had much more experience than he in the management of

98





celebrity and was quite expert in the art of drawing attention to herself.
She moved with an entourage as large as a contemporary hip-hop star's
posse. The juxtaposition of Bernhardt and Edison exposed their differ
ences: he, uncomfortable with celebrity; she, fully in her element.

Bernhardt's original plan was to pay a visit to Menlo Park in the early
evening of 4 December, after giving a matinee performance in New
York City, her last before traveling to Boston the next day. The plan
failed to account for the delays caused by her overly appreciative fans.
When her carriage arrived at the theater before the performance, a
crowd of autograph seekers was waiting; it took twenty-five minutes to
get from carriage to stage door. After the third act of La Dame aux Ca
rnifias, her American audience insisted on seventeen curtain calls, and
then after the final act, another twenty-nine. She dispatched her sister
out the rear door of the theater where Bernhardt herself was expected,
then snuck out the front unnoticed. On her own, it took an extra hour

to return to her hotel. By the time she and her party were ready to de
part, it was ten o'clock. The train was a local doing a milk run; it took
hours to deliver them to Menlo Park.

Upon arrival at the depot near Edison's lab, Bernhardt, her furs, and
her retinue were loaded into carriages and headed up the hill to Edison's
house. It was 2:00 A.M., and waiting for the visitors in the bitterly cold
night were four men, two women, and a girl. Never having seen a
photograph of Edison, Bernhardt feit a moment of panic: Which one
was he? When she leaped out of the coach, she received a bouquet of
flowers from Mrs. Edison, she presumed. But she still could not figure
out which of the four men, all of whom moved closer to her, was Mr.
Edison. Then she picked him out: he was the one blushing slightly, and
in his eyes she saw traces of irritation. With a start, she realized that her

visit was bothering him: "He saw in my visit only the banal curiosity of
a foreigner drunk on publicity. He already foresaw the interviews the
day after, and the stupid remarks that would be put in his mouth. He
suffered in advance for the ignorant questions that I was going to put to
him, and the explanations that politeness would force him to give me;
and for a minute Thomas Edison disliked me."



100 / 

Bernhardt then called upon "the full force of my seductive power to

conquer this wonderful shy scientist," and in her memoirs claims that
they were soon "the best friends in the world." Her credibility on what
she observed during the tour of the laboratory and dinner served after
ward is shaky-she described Edison's electric light as so dazzling as to
create "an impression of full daylight." What Edison recalled about the
visit in the interviews late in his life that serve as his memoirs was Bern

hardt's interest in everything she saw; her long dress that one of Edi
son's assistants was assigned to watch carefully so that it was not caught
in a machine; and the cumbersome process of translating everything
from English into French. Ultimately, Bernhardt chose to treat him the
same way as a member of the general American public did, idealizing
the person whom Bernhardt called "this King of Light."

Two years before Bernhardt's visit, Edison had begun his own career in
stage business, when he had brought a single prop-his new phono
graph-to the offices of Scientific American. He subsequently had fa
vored the use of his Menlo Park laboratory as his preferred stage, and,
with the professionalism of an actor in a Broadway hit, had performed
the same play, with the phonograph as costar, hundreds of times. Dur
ing the whole of 1879, Edison had built his presentation around the
electric light, but short-lived bulbs could not be displayed for long, so
the performances were brief and infrequent. With the cardboard fila
ment proving to be longer lived, however, Edison had begun taking
steps in preparation for a full demonstration to the general public when
Sarah Bernhardt had paid her visit. By that time, he had illuminated the
front rooms of his and Upton's houses with electric light, utilizing the
gaslight fixtures. Bernhardt's visit, which went well, served to bolster
everyone's confidence and speed preparations for lighting up the labora
tory and opening its doors again to the public.

A month before, in November 1879, one of Edison's reporter-friends,
Edwin Fox of the New York Herald, was given exclusive access to the

laboratory and to Edison for two weeks, while forty bulbs and fixtures





were being installed throughout the laboratory buildings. As a condi
tion of giving access, Edison had asked Fox to embargo his story until
the date that Edison would provide him, when tests and preparations
were complete. Fox accepted the arrangement and worked on the story;
Upton helped with revisions.

On Sunday, 21 December 1879, the Herald published "Edison's
Light," catching Edison by surprise and infuriating him. The article was
flattering in the extreme, however, describing the completed light as a
"little globe of sunshine," without giving off gases, smoke, or odors. It
gave all credit to one person, Edison. But as Edison knew full well, the

publication of an article reporting the "perfection" of the light would
bring yet another onslaught of curious visitors, for which preparations
were not complete. He also knew that his reputation, already damaged
during the previous year, would be irreparably harmed if the public
once again expected to see a durable light and was again disappointed.
A New York Herald editorial, "Edison's Eureka-the Electric Light at
Last," spoke of how the public's faith in the Wizard of Menlo Park had
grown "feeble" when silence had followed the announcement the previ
ous year of Edison's invention. Now, the newspaper said, Edison finally
had the goods to make the gas companies quail. For Edison, receiving
such highly visible support was helpful to the cause, but the timing was
hardly ideal.

The Herald article also made public all of the technical details that
Edison's many competitors in the incandescent light field could have
hoped for. William Sawyer, for example, immediately fired off letters to
the major newspapers, claiming that Edison was infringing on a num
ber of his own patents. And when Edison was not infringing, Sawyer
said, he was hawking technology that simply would not work. He
dared Edison to run one of his bulbs three hours, explaining that even if
Edison achieved a perfect vacuum inside the bulb, it would not last ten
minutes. Edison returned the challenge, daring Sawyer to reach three
hours with his own bulb. Sawyer responded by saying that the publicity
that Edison was so skilled at generating for himself was a transparent
ploy to raise money in the capital markets.



102 / 

A conservative response to this provocation would have been for Edi
son to put off the demonstration until ready, placating newspapers with
descriptions of the longevity of the latest bulbs built in the laboratory. At
that time, Edison bragged that he had a bulb that had burned 108 hours;
with assumptions that favored his case, he stretched this into a claim
that this would provide a family with light for evening hours for twenty
four days. But stung by the skeptics and challengers who spoke up after
the Herald article, Edison felt strongly that he now had to show, not
tell. He responded with a public promise: In short order, no later than
the end of that week, he would light up ten houses in Menlo Park with
his electric light, and set up ten electric streetlamps.

When Egisto Fabbri, one of the directors of the Edison Electric Light
Company, learned of Edison's plan, he was aghast. On 26 December,
Fabbri tried to find just the right tone to head off a premature demon
stration. "I am much older than you are and a friend," he wrote Edison,
covering all angles, going on to suggest that it would be best if Edison
were to first tryout the electric lights, indoors and out, for one continu
ous week before inviting the public in. Fabbri made a good argument:
"As long as you are trying private experiments, even before 50 people,
partial failure, a mishap, would amount to nothing, but if you were to
express yourself ready to give a public demonstration of what you con
sidered a complete success, any disappointment would be extremely
damaging, and probably more so than may appear to you as a scien
tific man."

Edison was not accustomed to receiving suggestions from anyone,
even key investors. He did not openly defy Fabbri, but instead of taking
a week to carry out a nonpublic test, he devoted only one evening to the
trial run. For a group of invited friends, he set up bulbs in the labora

tory for a showing, from 6:00 to 10:00 P.M. Each bulb gave about the
same illumination as a gas jet, and there were no mishaps. The next
night, on the twenty-eighth, uninvited strangers" of all classes" came to
Menlo Park to see the light, said one newspaper account, and more ar
rived the next night. Those who "hold that Rome was built in a day"
were disappointed that the lampposts that had been set up in a field as if



STAGECRAF"T\I03

they lined a real street still lacked electric lights, which awaited the ar
rival of another generator.

Two and then four more streetlamps were electrified. The boarding
house of Edison's neighbor Sarah Jordan was outfitted with lights and
opened up to visitors. Just as quickly, the stream of tourists descending
upon Menlo Park grew, with hundreds arriving in the daytime, even be
fore nightfall. The laboratory itself was opened to the public, too. The
number of people crowding into the limited space made work impos
sible; the laboratory assistants found themselves fully occupied answer
ing questions, and trying to protect the equipment from damage.
"Requests and notices not to touch or handle were unavailing," said
one report, and one of the best vacuum pumps was broken by some
strangers who had given themselves permission to conduct their own

experiments.
Edison was not, as his rival Sawyer charged, attempting just then to

raise capital on Wall Street-the Edison Electric Light Company had
been recapitalized just the previous month. But an incidental effect of
placing his electric light in public view in Menlo Park was to excite the
interest of traders. Company stock now was changing hands for $3,500
a share. Francis Upton received, and gladly accepted, an offer for five of
his shares, at $5,000 a share, a tidy windfall for someone who had been
paid $12 a week earlier in the year. The spike in prices did draw the cen
sorious attention of the New York Times, which wrote in an editorial
that "a suspicion arises that much of the appearance of success may be
factitious and intended for stock-jobbing uses."

On New Year's Eve, extra trains were run to bring the curious to
Menlo Park, and the laboratory added new stunts to the show. One
bulb was submerged under water in a large glass jar, amazing onlookers
with its ability to function. Across the room a lab assistant manually
flicked one light on and off rapidly, as many times, it was claimed, as a
household would switch a light on and off over the course of thirty
years, and on it burned. Edison made himself available, putting on a

performance on his own terms, wearing a rough suit of work clothes,
and impressing the New York Herald as "a simple young man attired in



104/ 

the homeliest manner, using for his explanations not high sounding,
technical terms, but the plainest and simplest language."

The next day, however, on New Year's, the numbers of visitors in
creased to the point that the crowd became unmanageable. The willing
ness of Edison to turn his laboratory into a public theater had succeeded,
only too well. When he appeared, a shout, "There is Edison!" rang out,
causing a surge of bodies in his direction. One report claimed that the
crowds "more than once threatened to break down the timbers of the

building," a statement that may not have been hyperbole; the lab assis
tants were convinced that collapse was possible and hurried outside,
bolstering the floor supports below with telegraph poles and lumber.
Where the realm of science ended and that of entertainment began
could no longer be distinguished, judging by the printed condemnation
of the behavior of a minority of the visitors who "cared nothing for sci
ence, who regarded the laboratory as they would a circus."

In the laboratory itself, the lights were arranged on a table to resemble
a miniature layout of Menlo Park, and Edison had assigned assistants
on all four sides to look out for sabotage. Their vigilance was needed
that day, as one man was caught applying a jumper wire that ran under
his clothes and down both sleeves, deliberately short-circuiting four of
the lights. He turned out to be an electrician employed by the Baltimore
Gas Company and was marched out, with language ringing in his ears
"that made the recording angels jump for their typewriters," Edison
later recalled.

Early in the evening of New Year's Day, as order in the laboratory
gave way to chaos, Edison sought refuge in his private office. But distin
guished visitors would show up, insisting that they see the great man
himself, and he would have to appear, answer the same questions that
he had already addressed countless times before. Seeing this reluctant
showman forced to work the crowd, the correspondent for the New
York Tribune described Edison with tenderness: "Edison is one of the

most retiring of men, detesting all pomp and show, resembling the
ladies in his desire to get away into the forests of solitude." The next



 \ 105

day, on 2 January, Edison ordered that the lab be closed to the general
public so work could resume.

The public-relations benefits from the Menlo Park demonstration
proved short lived. Without the rollout of commercial service in New
York or another city, the show ended without disarming the skeptics
who said that Edison's lighting system had yet to be tested outside of his
cozy laboratory and own home. An English critic described Edison's
many announcements with acidic sarcasm:

What a happy man Mr. Edison must be! Three times within the
short space of 18 months he has had the glory of finally and tri
umphantly solving a problem of world-wide interest.... If he
continues to observe the same strict economy of practical results
which has hitherto characterized his efforts in electric lighting,
there is no reason why he should not for the next 20 years com
pletely solve the problem of the electric light twice a year with
out in any way interfering with its interest or novelty.

The price of Edison Electric Light Company stock quickly fell from
$4,000 a share to $500.

Edison was reminded daily that as the world-famous inventor, he had
to defend himself daily against attacks that his counterparts who la
bored in obscurity could never imagine. This was especially the case
when the commercial potential of the invention was clearly visible to
all. The phonograph had not caused him similar tribulation. Two years
after its public debut, it was not regarded as a potentially lucrative in
vention, even by its progenitor. At this moment Edison had been ob
served to treat the phonograph "with the same degree of interest as a
boarding school miss would allude to a discarded doll," in the view of
the Philadelphia Record. The latest attempt by a licensee to make a
business out of it was in the form of a toy, but those machines were so

flawed that no distributor would accept them. Edward Johnson sighed:
"The trouble with them is, not one person out of 50 has mechanical



106 / 

skill enough to adjust them as per instructions." Edison took what solace
he could in the observation that at least no one was bothering him with
claims of inventing the phonograph twenty-five years previously. But
the moment an inventor" has perfected something of commercial value,
something that will conflict with the interests of long-established mo
nopolies," he told an interviewer, "then there is a general rush to en
deavor to pull him down."

Closing the laboratory to the general public was one way to protect
himself and the electric light from industrial spies. For those who had
an academic or business interest in the experimental work and made
arrangements in advance, he remained welcoming-too much so. A
professional snoop who purported to be interested in licensing Edison's
technology for manufacturing purposes quickly won Edison's confidence
and was provided a tour of all of the facilities with Charles Batchelor as
his guide. The visitor published a pamphlet based on the tour, intending
to discredit Edison, but he had seen nothing that was serviceable for
this purpose. Instead, he saw that the incandescent lights worked well.
The worst he could say about them was that each light could be turned
only on or off; an intermediate level of brightness could not be set. He
was told that some of the bulbs burned continuously for eight hundred
hours, but that they would be tested for eight more months before the
system would be introduced for public use.

The company directors were willing, however, to put the electric light
to an immedia te test in the real world for Henry Villard, one of the

company's investors, as long it was done out of public view, in case the
test went awry. Among Villard's other financial interests was the Ore

gon Railway and Navigation Company, which had given John Roach, a
leading shipbuilder, a commission to build a new 334-foot steamship,
the Columbia. Impressed by the exhibition of the electric light in Menlo
Park, Villard decided that to fulfill his wish that the Columbia be outfit
ted with state-of-the-art equipment, it should have electric lights, too.
Over Roach's objections that the light should be proven on land before
tried on the sea, Villard gave Edison a contract for the work. Power for



 \ 107

the lights would be supplied by the ship's steam plant. Francis Upton
was assigned the task of hand-carrying to the shipyard a basket with a
delicate cargo-the lightbulbs, wrapped in cotton batting-while
dodging traffic on the city streets, as no one wanted to test whether the
bulbs would survive a crosstown trip on a wagon.

The Columbia sailed on its maiden voyage in May 1880, carrying lo
comotives and railcars around Cape Horn and then up to Portland. The
electric lights did well on their first practical test outside of Menlo Park,
but the designers thought it best to have a professional control the lights
in the individual cabins. The ship's steward had to be called to unlock a
box outside each stateroom and throw the switch whenever a passenger
wanted a light turned on and off.

In reality, Edison's electric light had yet to be tested in a setting that
resembled its intended destination, in a commercial urban district. But
in the imagination of his associates, it shone brightly, at least when de
scribed to lovers. Grosvenor Lowrey, the Edison Electric Light Com
pany's attorney, can be forgiven for concocting mumbo jumbo for
impressing his fiance: "Be thou to me, my love, a low resistance lamp!
Be a voltaic arc! & not a nasty high resistance continuous conductor."
Lowrey also told his beloved that spending time with Edison had im
proved Lowrey's spirits. "Perhaps I'd better marry him, since he cures
me," he teased her.

When Lowrey showed Edison a miniature photograph of her, Edison
offered a compliment about her looks, but then asked him, "Why is it,
Lowrey, that so few women have brains? Men of brains it is easy to find,
but women-" Edison's own wife was almost completely invisible in
contemporaneous accounts of his life written by his closest associates.
When she appears, it is as a foil for a tale of how Edison could not abide

her concern for middle-class appearances and propriety. A man who did
odd jobs around the Menlo Park lab, for example, tells a story of how
Mrs. Edison managed to get Mr. Edison home, where she "dolled him
up in a fifty-dollar suit." Edison stayed put for a short while "looking
pretty," then fled for the lab. In the tale, Edison was found at the lab



108 / 

two weeks later, still wearing the same suit, having not been home the
whole while. The suit, covered in grease and dirt, was ruined, a fact that
went unnoticed by its wearer.

Edison knew how to mimic the sounds of a pragmatic businessperson,
but the decisions he made then, as well as throughout the remainder of
his life, favored new projects over near-term payoff of old ones. After
countless performances of "Mary Had a Little Lamb," the novelty of
the phonograph had worn off, and he had failed to sustain his interest
long enough to see the machine's development through to commercial
introduction of a model for the mass market. Still, as he and his labora

tory staff brought the electric light into viable form, it is striking how
Edison's interest waned here, too. Despite his avowed near-term prag
matism, Edison got excited about another idea of his: electric trains.

The idea originated in his interest in mining, and when in the spring
of 1880 he first sketched out the electric train that he had in mind, it
was capable of astounding feats. He thought electrical power could give
a train's wheels the ability to grip the rails as if clamped upon them, en
abling the train to run up and down steep mountains. There would be
no need to drill tunnels again, he said in an interview published in the
Denver Tribune. No need for human engineers or brakemen, either.

Freight trains could be controlled by telegraph.
This project hardly offered prospects of meeting the criterion he had

vowed to use, that is, likely to "pay in the near future." But there was
another aspect that made it attractive: It would make a terrific show for

the public. In April 1880, Edison ordered workers to lay down a half
mile of track in Menlo Park for his electric railroad prototype, equipped
with a modified dynamo as its motor, with current supplied by the rails.
It was the picture of a freckle-faced boy, working under a hot summer
sun, that left an indelible picture in the mind of David Trumball Mar

shall, a laboratory associate, who, many years later, wrote a memoir
about his experiences. The unidentified boy had to dip each railroad tie
into hot, liquefied asphalt, to render it nonconducting were it to get



STAGECRAF"T\I09

wet. Day after day, the work went on with melancholy repetition. "It
takes brains and brawns to perfect inventions," Marshall observed, and
it was that boy who "furnished some of the brawn."

Upon completion, the track was extended across the hilly country
side, and a ride on the little railroad became the new novelty for visi
tors. Edison took strange enjoyment in his own ability to remain
unaffected by conditions that made others around him physically
queasy. In previous summers, when he had taken his laboratory assis
tants fishing on the banks of the Atlantic, and rough seas had driven the
others to the bottom of the boat, immobilized with seasickness, Edison

thought it amusing to swing a piece of rancid pork across the noses of
his suffering men. "The smell was terrific," said one account, "and the
effect added to the hilarity of the excursion."

Offering rides on the train offered opportunities for more "hilarity."
In early June, Lowrey wrote his fiance with an account of his ride at
forty miles an hour through sharp curves, protesting that the speed was
not safe, while Edison brushed his concerns aside. Then the train

jumped the tracks, throwing the temporary engineer from the track,
face down in the dirt, "and another man in a comical somersault

through some underbrush." Edison hopped off, but instead of rushing
to the aid of the two, he was described as "jumping & laughing & de
claring it a most beautiful accident." The foreign-born engineer man
aged to stand up, though clearly shaken up, and with face bleeding,
mimicked Edison's earlier reassurances to everyone: "Oh, yes, pair
feckly safe! "

Work proceeded on the electric light at the same time. In July, the labo
ratory began experimenting with bamboo for use as a filament in place
of cardboard. This created the need for "bamboo hunters" to search

out the varieties with characteristics most suitable for the purpose. The

first bamboo hunter dispatched was John Segredor, who was a labora
tory staff member known for his fierce temper. His lab mates liked to

provoke him just for their own entertainment. On one occasion, they



IIO/

were rewarded richly when Segredor told the group, "The next man
[who provokes me], I will kill him." The threat was received as enter
tainment and instantly forgotten. The next day, a colleague directed a
sarcastic remark at Segredor as before, but this time, Segredor left with
out a word and was next seen marching back up the hill toward the lab
with his gun (the building quickly emptied). This brought an end to the
sarcasm. In late August, Edison sent Segredor first to Georgia and Florida
to collect bamboo specimens, and then on to Cuba, turning botanical
research into an adventure. For Segredor, the adventure did not last
long. He arrived in Havana on a Tuesday; that Friday, he died of "the
black vomit" (yellow fever). Edison placed the blame on the victim him
self, writing a mutual friend that he had cautioned Segredor "about his
diet and about drinking cold drinks but as you say he was very self
willed and would always do in these respects about as he pleased and
this I doubt not caused his death."

Edison decided against sending a replacement to Cuba, but sent an
other emissary, William Moore, to Japan and China, and an indefatigable
traveler, John Branner, to Brazil. Traversing Brazil's interior by canoe
and foot, Branner collected many specimens during a two-thousand
mile journey, but none was the equal of a certain Japanese variety that
Moore had found. Moore arranged to have one Japanese farmer supply
all of the bamboo that Edison would ever need, an arrangement that
must have been satisfactory to all parties as it would last many years.

Edison designated Menlo Park itself as an outdoor annex for his
work and prepared to expand the real-world demonstration of his
bulbs by laying out a grid of wires through the fields, along imaginary
roads, to support three hundred or four hundred streetlights. The work
was well advanced, with more than five miles of wire placed under
ground, when Upton began testing the insulation and discovered that it
was defective. Even at the time, there was considerable head-scratching
among Edison's colleagues about how Edison could have permitted the
project to advance so far without anyone testing the circuits as work

proceeded.
Perhaps the explanation is a simple one: The overly hasty rush was the



 \ III

consequence of Edison's desire to retain the attention of the press so that

his electric light would not be outshone by those of competitors. As the
months passed, more disturbing news about the competition came in. In
October, Edwin Fox, the reporter, wrote Edison from Manhattan that as
he sat at his desk and looked out the window of his skyscraper office and
peered into the window of the office in the next building, he saw about
twenty individuals busily at work-making electric lightbulbs. Fox was
certain that they were baldly infringing upon Edison's patents.

It happened that Fox was peering into the office of the United States
Electric Lighting Company, which made an incandescent bulb based on
the design of Hiram Maxim and was immediately identifiable by a fila
ment that resembled the letter "M." As far as Edison was concerned,
the bulb was a "clean steal" of his own cardboard-filament design,
thinly disguised by the cutesy "M." When interviewed, he professed to
be unconcerned. "I do not worry about them, or a hundred like them. I

always expected them and there will be more of them." But United
States Electric had not merely begun manufacturing, it had already in
stalled a working exhibition of 150 bulbs in a basement reading room
of the Equitable Building, the home of its Manhattan office. Edison's
laboratory could argue the technical merits of its newer bamboo fila
ment, but in the image game, it was now behind. United States Electric
had got the jump on Edison Electric by being the first to establish a
presence in New York City. Its lights soon were installed in several other
offices and the post office, powered by generators on the premises in
each case. Edison must have been upset, too, by the way that George
Barker, his friend at the University of Pennsylvania, seemed to have
switched allegiance, writing him that Maxim's bulbs were brighter than
Edison's, an observation that Barker felt he had to share with Edison
because "my own self-respect requires me to be honest, even with a
friend, like yourself. "

Edison also had to contend with a new manifestation of hostility: car
toons that turned the image of the Wizard of Menlo Park into a charla
tan. In one cartoon that appeared in 1880, captioned "The Decadence of
the Wizard of Menlo Park," Edison is depicted as a can man, playing a



112 / 

shell game with nonsensically named inventions, offering to show "the
Great Invention Trick." Place your money on the table, receive a share of
stock, then "now you see them, and now you don't see 'em!"

Edison would not be able to quell the criticism, nor best Maxim and
other competitors, by means of technical specifications. Nor was the
competition to establish the electric light one that would be fought pri
marily in the courts. Rather, Edison was the reluctant participant in a
contest of marketing strategies. The bigger the stage, the better. The Edi
son Electric Light Company urgently needed to complete Edison's origi
nal plan of introducing his electric lights in Lower Manhattan, connected
to what would be the first system of centralized power generation. To lay
the electrical lines, however, the company needed the permission of the

Tammany-dominated city government, one of the most corrupt govern
mental bodies in an age defined by political corruption.

The Brush Electric Light Company, having negotiated an under
standing with the city well before Edison's company was ready, was the
first company to be able to flip the switch, in dramatic fashion, sending
power from a central station to lights installed along Broadway, be
tween Fourteenth and Twenty-seventh Streets, at 5 :25 P.M. on 20 De
cember 1880. Brush had arranged with the city's Department of Public
Works to secure permission for a two-week trial in the city. In doing so,
the company had shown its willingness to take on considerable finan
cial risk in order to obtain the opportunity to show its lights in the most
coveted location in the country. Not only did it offer the service to the
city free of charge, it had to accept a provision that gave the department
the right to order that the streetlamps be taken down on a day's notice.

The debut of Brush lighting went well. The lights were mounted on
corrugated iron posts that stood twenty feet tall, double the height of
the gas lamps (they, too, were turned on that evening, permitting a side
by-side comparison). The arc lights were sufficiently bright that a news
paper could be read while standing 150 feet away from a post. One
account described an "artistic effect" produced by the contrast of bril
liant white and deep black, as in the sight of white horses attached to an
elegant carriage standing outside of Tiffany's, surrounded by an impen-



STAGECRAF'T\ 113

etrably black background. As bright as the arc lights were, however,
this stretch of Broadway was already well lighted by gas lighting in the
shops. When the city cut off the gas streetlamps at six o'clock to see
how much light was supplied by the arc lights alone, the ambient light
thrown out by the shop windows made it hard to even notice that the
gas lamps on the street had been turned off. Still, the drama of the elec
tric light display was heightened, albeit artificially, by the presence of
ten uniformed policeman assigned to stand along the route of the Brush
Electric Light Company's wires (whether to guard against sabotage or
to serve as ornamentation was not explained).

In making arrangements with the city to lay wires for his service, Edi
son had not pursued a contract for street lighting. He knew his bulb
was ill suited for the purpose, and even were that not the case, he ex

pected to be fully occupied initially with supplying individual busi
nesses with service. Even as a private businessperson, however, seeking
to provide service to other private interests, he had encountered sub
stantial bureaucratic obstacles. The Department of Public Works tried
to apply the same terms to Edison Electric as it had to Brush Electric, in
sisting that the city could withdraw permission with only one day's no
tice. Edison countered that he could justify making the considerable
investment in laying lines only if he were provided with irrevocable per
mission that would extend a full year. This seems to have been a reason

able request, so Public Works could say nothing other than that it was
powerless to bestow a utility franchise of such duration, and pushed the
problem upstairs, to the city's Board of Aldermen.

Edison himself had neither the experience nor the temperament to
work with a group of professional politicians known for being more at
tentive to personal pecuniary interests than to the public weal. Fortu
nately, Grosvenor Lowrey knew that this was the time to step forward
and propose a modus vivendi that did not involve bribes, but did in
volve currying of favor from political operators. Lowrey obtained Edi
son's consent to provide a special performance of the Menlo Park magic
light show for the New York Board of Aldermen.

It's impossible to determine whether Lowrey was supernaturally savvy,



114 / 

or just plain lucky, but the evening he set for the demonstration in
Menlo Park for New York's City Fathers was 20 December, the very
same evening that Broadway would be transformed into the Great
White Way by Brush Electric. The aldermen missed the spectacle in
New York, pulling in to Menlo Park on a private train provided by the
Pennsylvania Railroad exactly at the moment when Brush Electric
made its Broadway debut. Edison Electric attempted to put on a show
of equal dramatic power in Menlo Park, having installed three hundred
streetlamps in a double file up the hill. All were alight when the visitors
from New York arrived, and the press accounts praised their "soft, mel
low" light. No one pointed out-in print, at least-that Edison Electric
was not planning on competing head-to-head with Brush for the street
lighting business and that this display was decorative but effectively
useless. Unlike Brush's two-thousand-candlepower lights arrayed along
Broadway, Edison's sixteen-candlepower incandescent bulb was of use
only indoors. When placed outside it did little but illuminate the protec
tive white globe within which it sat.

Two years before, Grosvenor Lowrey had overridden Edison's objec
tions and insisted that Edison spend a portion of his advance payment
from the Edison Electric Light Company on a separate two-story brick
building to serve as an office and library. Edison had argued that his little
office on the ground floor of the laboratory was sufficient for his needs,
but Lowrey had countered that he must have a suitable place to receive
distinguished visitors, one that projected an image of financial solidity. A
new freestanding office was built, and on Lowrey's orders Edison had
purchased the finest cherry furniture, identical to the pieces in Lowrey's
own offices in the Drexel Building in New York City. These proved to be
farsighted preparations for this moment, when the party of visitors
climbed the hill and stepped into Edison's richly appointed office.

Edison was haggard in appearance, with uncombed hair, and as he
greeted each person with a handshake, one reporter described Edison as
wearing "a forced look of pleasantry." Just as Edison had been ex
pected to perform the same routine ad nauseam when the phonograph
was unveiled, now he was called upon to do parlor tricks with the elec-



\ 115

tric lights, though the possibilities for a variety show were limited.
Leading his visitors to the laboratory, he had them look out the win
dows when, with a signal to an assistant, the power was cut to the twin
lines of outside lights. The visitors began to applaud, and then, in a
twinkling, the lights were brought back on. "That's the last of the lamp
lighters, if we have the electric light in New York," one of the visitors
said to another. The city's savings in labor costs resulting from the dis
mantling of gas streetlamps maintained by humans was not viewed by
this group as purely positive, however. A city commissioner recalled
that a machine sweeper had once been introduced to Central Park:

"'What do you think of it, Pat?' he asked a sweeper employed there. 'It's
a wonderful thing,' said Pat, 'but yer 'oner,' he added archly, 'devil a
vote it can cast.' The Mayor took the hint. The force was retained, and
the machine received no endorsement."

It was a moment of awkwardness for Edison and his associates, and
could easily have been avoided. After all, his light was not going to be
marketed for use as street lighting, so there had been no need to allow
the aldermen to worry about the potential loss of patronage. It fell to
Lowrey to keep the guests moving toward the evening's final act, fol
lowing the tour of the laboratory and the machine shop: a feast catered
by New York City's Delmonico's Restaurant (birthplace of baked Alaska
and lobster Newburg). The spread was laid out in the laboratory, tended
by gloved waiters in formal evening wear who did not stint when pour
ing champagne.

Edison did not know the protocol for such occasions-he ate and
drank oblivious to the fact that he was still wearing his sealskin hat
but Lowrey was an adept master of ceremonies. After allowing his
guests time to fill themselves and let the ample quantities of alcohol take
effect, he rose to give the first after-dinner speech. He began with com
pliments for the mayor, and then for the aldermen, and only after
warming up his audience did he launch into a talking advertisement for
Edison and his great enterprise and the difficult challenge of making the
light not brighter, but less bright, into a "soft, mellow light, which was
adapted to commercial needs." Edison's was the "perfect light."



116 / 

Edison was strongly averse to speaking in public and allowed Lowrey
to speak on his behalf. The guests then followed with perorations that
became more ornate as one followed another. The champagne flowed,
"Menlo Park" became "Melno Park," and the drinking continued even
after the aldermen boarded their train at ten o'clock for the return

home. The effects of the alcohol produced the impression, recorded by
the reporter for New York Truth, that "each alderman looked as

though he thought himself the Mayor of New York." The paper de
clared Edison's demonstration a "decided success, especially of his
guests' capacity for Champagne."

When the aldermen woke up the next day, the convivial feelings for
Edison with which they had left Menlo Park were replaced by hang
overs. Negotiations resumed and the aldermen would not back down
from onerous terms, asking the Edison Electric Light Company to pay
ten cents a linear foot for the privilege of laying wire. With wires run
ning in parallel along both sides of every street, this charge would run
about $1,000 a mile. The city also wanted 3 percent of gross receipts
after the first five years. Outraged, Edison made the terms public in Jan
uary 1881, seeking support for terms more favorable to the company.
Brush Electric had not had to pay the city anything for the privilege of
operating, Edison pointed out. He also made noises that if he could not
obtain reasonable terms, he would take his business to a more hos

pitable place, such as Newark or Philadelphia.
Edison's public airing of his grievances over proposed terms did not

result in any noticeable strengthening of his bargaining power. His rep
resentatives and the city government would wrangle for four more
months before settling upon five cents a linear foot as a franchise fee. In
the meantime, however, Brush Electric had adroitly moved from brief
free demonstration, to free demonstration of longer duration, and then
to a profitable city contract to light a number of important locations in
addition to Broadway. Well positioned on the most visible streets, the
company was asked to light hotels and theaters, providing lighting that
also met "commercial needs," the segment of the marketplace that



 \ 117

Lowrey had attempted to position the Edison Electric Light Company
as uniquely capable of addressing.

Menlo Park had been the perfect locale for Edison's laboratory when
the quest for novelty would bring eager feature writers to Edison's door,
happy to describe whatever was put on display. But now that Edison
Electric had formidable competition that was well entrenched in the
most visible part of the most visible city, a rural train stop was no longer
the best-placed stage. A member of the Edison Electric Light Company
board came up with an intriguing idea: leasing a four-story brownstone
residence in Manhattan to house the company offices, strategically situ
ated in a prominent location, on Fifth Avenue, just south of Fourteenth
Street. With the installation of a gas-powered power plant in the base
ment and two hundred incandescent lights throughout the building, 65
Fifth Avenue could serve as a glowing advertisement for the company's
lighting on display every night, indoors, where it was designed for use,
yet in a location easily visible to the passersby and open for visitors
to tour.

For the company to fully exploit the potential of offering attractions
at 65 Fifth Avenue that could not be found anywhere else, Edison him
self would have to be installed there along the with the two hundred
light fixtures. He would have to be willing to spend more time glad
handing visiting strangers than had ever been the case in Menlo Park,
where he had been protected by the relative isolation of the laboratory.
Yet in early 1881, when his business interests required a personal sacri
fice on his part, moving into an almost full-time role as greeter, he did a
brave thing: He accepted the responsibility to contribute in whatever
way would most help the business, regardless of how much he loathed
the role, and how reluctantly he relinquished control of the miniature
universe embodied in the Menlo Park laboratory. In early February
1881, Edison began to spend his daytime hours at the Fifth Avenue of
fice, returning to Menlo Park at night. At the end of the month, he
moved his family into a hotel across the street from the office. He now
could make himself available to personally receive the lines of visitors,



liB / 

including scientists, financiers, actors, diplomats, and sundry royalty
(afterward, in private, he would do wicked impressions of the famous
for the entertainment of the staff). In its first year on Fifth Avenue, the

company rarely closed its doors before midnight.
The Menlo Park laboratory was emptied, with just his junior assis

tant Francis Jehlleft there to perform whatever miscellaneous tests of
equipment he was asked to do. Jehl was certain that Edison would
never close the laboratory completely, and would eventually return
there after the temporary need to be in New York City had passed. But
just three months after Edison had moved himself and his family to
Fifth Avenue, he sent Jehl a short note telling him to pack up the re
maining equipment and join him in New York. In Jehl's memory, the or
ders were a surprise and meant he would have to give up the "soothing
seclusion in God's open country, away from the beaten tracks of men."

In retrospect, he should have taken heart in Edison's example: Edison
had the most reason to appreciate the seclusion of Menlo Park, and yet
he acquiesced when necessity tapped on his shoulder, calling him to cen
ter stage.



CHAPTER SIX



FEBRUARY 1881-SEPTEMBER 1882

WHEN
THOMAS EDISON MADE plans to build his first cen

tralized power plant in Lower Manhattan, the city had many
surprises in store for him. Real estate presented the first

problem. Edison must have been the last person in the country to notice
that Manhattan is an impossibly expensive place to be. Only "the very
rich can afford the expense," said an observer-in 1882. Oblivious,
Edison had drawn up blueprints for an installation that would require a
single floor about two hundred feet square. He assumed that by select
ing a "slum street" near the waterfront with the most dilapidated prop
erties, he would be able to pick up the property he would need for
about $10,000. He was way off the mark, however. The available prop
erties were four-storied industrial buildings that were only twenty-five
feet across, not two hundred, and only eighty-five or one hundred feet
deep. Edison purchased two adjacent buildings on Pearl Street, which
cost not $10,000 but $155,000. With much less space with which to
work, he replaced the plan of his original layout with a creative revi
sion. Gutting one of them, he reconstructed the interior with structural
steel, building up instead of out.

He took in stride his first serious financial setbacks. When the direc

tors of the Edison Electric Light Company declined to invest in facilities
for manufacturing the dynamos whose spinning generated electricity,
Edison founded a new company, the Edison Machine Works, to take on
the responsibility, and took over shipbuilder John Roach's Etna Iron

119



120 / 

Works on the Lower East Side. Acting with admirable boldness for some
one without adequate liquid assets. Edison directed George Gouraud, his
representative in Europe, to unload Edison's holdings in various tele
phone interests, such as the Edison Telephone Company of Glasgow.
He wrote Gouraud that he would sell all his holdings before touching
his shares in Edison Electric, which he wanted to hold "as long as pos
sible." (He eventually succeeded in getting the Machine Works funded
without touching his prized shares in the light company.)

The directors of Edison Electric wanted nothing to do with the manu
facture of lightbulbs, either. Edison and his closest associates-Charles
Batchelor, Francis Upton, and Edward Johnson-pooled $35,000 of
their personal resources to found the Edison Lamp Company ("lamp"
referred to bulbs). Edward Johnson, along with former Edison associate
Sigmund Bergmann, founded still another company that would manu
facture light fixtures, switches, sockets, and related hardware. Bergmann
was a German-born machinist who had run his own machine shop after
leaving Edison's. A few years earlier, Johnson had provided Bergmann's
shop with a contract for small demonstration phonographs, a line of
business that had not been successful but had brought the two men
closer, leading now to the establishment of Bergmann & Company. The
two partners decided it would be in their best interests to add Edison as a

third equal partner. When they asked him if he were interested in joining
them, Edison inquired, "For how much?" Without consulting his part
ner, Johnson said, "For nothing but goodwill," and the deal was sealed
on the spot with a handshake. Bergmann later said ruefully that he and
Johnson left money on the table: "Edison would have been glad to pay
us fifty thousand dollars."

In the push to commercialize his electric light, Edison had never
taken on so much work, so much risk, and right in the center of the
media capital of the country. Technical problems, business issues, per
sonnel headaches-the obstacles in Edison's path were of a size he had
never encountered, yet he moved them out of his way, one by one. This
was real-time invention and problem solving, in every imaginable tech
nical and nontechnical domain, on an impressive scale. One reporter



 \ 121

marveled at Edison's quick recovery from dyspepsia that had briefly
confined him to bed: "What a wonderful amount of nervous energy
there is in this man."

Edison's energies continued to be applied exclusively to his business
interests. The family doctor was concerned about Mary Edison's state
of mental health, but as had been the case before, Edison did not change
his own plans to attend to her. "She seems very nervous and despondent
and thinks she will never recover," the doctor wrote Edison in January
1882. He suggested that Edison take her to Europe for a few months; at
the least, "something ought to be done."

Edison remained immersed in his work, however. He spent most of
his time at the Pearl Street station, or nearby. Often he napped on the
premises, sleeping on top of an electrical conduit that was stacked in the
cellar. It was both cold and damp, but Edison did not mind. Later, he re
called that two Germans who were employees who worked in the cellar
doing tests caught diphtheria there and died, but he was never affected.

One component of the project was designing, then building and in
stalling, the dynamos for the Pearl Street station. He insisted on custom
building a dynamo far larger than the ones he had used before, conceived
on a scale that required special tools. Another component was laying the
lines that Edison was determined to place underground, a more difficult
undertaking than stringing them overhead, where there already existed
a tangle of lines owned by Brush Electric and a multitude of telegraph,
telephone, and fire alarm companies. Edison had originally planned to
offer service to the entirety of south Manhattan, south of Canal Street
and north of Wall Street, but engineering considerations forced him to
carve out a smaller district, bounded by Wall, Nassau, Spruce, and Ferry
Streets. Still, his company had to place underground some eighty thou
sand linear feet of electrical wire. This had never been attempted before,
so it should not have been a surprise when H. o. Thompson, the city's
commissioner of public works, summoned Edison to his office to explain
that the city would have to be assured that the lines were installed safely.
Thompson was assigning five inspectors to oversee the work, whose cost
would be covered by an assessment of $5 per day, per inspector, payable



122 / 

each week. When Edison left Thompson's office, he was crestfallen, an
ticipating the harassment and delays ahead that would be caused by the
inspectors' interference. On the day that work began, however, the in
spectors failed to appear. Their first appearance was on Saturday after
noon, to draw their pay. This set the pattern that the inspectors
followed as the work proceeded through 1881 and into 1882.

The public was reminded of the lethal potential of electricity while
Edison's crews dug up the streets. They read in the newspaper that a
thirty-year-old dock laborer who was touring the Brush Electric Light
Company's Buffalo plant had leaned over a railing and gripped two
hanging wires. He dropped onto the railing, dead. In England, a series
of fatal accidents to workmen drew remarks about how "the electric

Frankenstein turns now and then upon the magician who has raised
him." About the same time, a German proposed building an electric
chair for executing criminals, which would bring death "instanta
neously." He tried out the concept on dogs, a horse, and an ox.

Edison's company did its best to distance itself from Brush and the

other arc light companies, arguing that the others used a form of elec
tricity that was as dangerous as Edison's was harmless. At this point,
before the "battle of the currents" had formally begun, the public was
not informed what exactly distinguished Edison's direct current from
arc light's alternating current. Direct current flows in the same direc
tion; alternating current flows in one direction, then reverses and flows
in the other, continuously changing. Both forms of current could electri
cally shock a human being, causing sustained contraction of muscles.
Alternating current poses an especially dangerous risk, however, be
cause its rapid discontinuous movement-flowing in this direction, then
that one-is more likely to scramble the neural subsystem that serves as
the heart's guiding metronome. Once the signals are scrambled, fibrilla
tion follows: rapid, ineffective contractions of the heart muscles that
fails to pump blood as it should. Alternating current's propensity to in
duce fibrillation gives direct current an edge in terms of safety.

Even if comparatively safer, however, direct current was capable of
inducing harmful, even fatal, shocks, too. Edison Electric was not wholly



 \ 123

honest with the public about its own safety issues. When the Pearl Street
station was running tests prior to the official launch of the service, a po
lice officer noticed that horses that passed a certain spot near the corner
of Nassau and Ann Streets would bolt, or drop to their knees, or per
form "certain equestrian antics such as had never before been witnessed,"
wrote Francis Jehl. Almost inevitably, a crowd gathered for the free en
tertainment. When a horse-drawn wagon approached the place where
the electrical "juice" was leaking, the people who stood on either side
maintained blankly innocent expressions for the wagon driver, silently
urging him to proceed. Then the horse was shocked and bounded off,
out of control. The police officers present also thought the horses' reac
tion was highly entertaining. Only when the crowd of onlookers grew
too large did they tell Edison Electric to cut the power and find the
problem. Edison went to see for himself and thought the shocks amus
ing, too, even as he directed a crew to locate the leak. The next day, a
visitor came to his office wishing to buy apparatus that he could install
at a horse market, where, in Edison's description, he "could get old nags
in there and make them act like thoroughbreds."

As soon as the newspapers had received word of the Nassau Street

shocks, reporters headed to the Pearl Street station to ask questions.
Charles Clarke, a Bowdoin classmate of Francis Upton's who had

joined Edison's staff in 1880, served as reluctant spokesperson. "We
have no evidence that the shocks, if there were any, came from our sta
tian," Clarke said cautiously, having delayed answering by taking off
his glasses and rubbing the lenses for a long while. The reporters
pressed, and Clarke ended up conceding that it was theoretically pos
sible, and even drew a sketch of how the leak may have occurred.

The president of Edison Electric, Major Sherburne Eaton, resorted to
what appeared to be the easiest course: emphatic denial of a problem.
He explained that he himself had "taken the full force of the entire cur
rent with my naked hands, and have seen hundreds of others do it, both
men and women, and always without the slightest shock." Eaton was
publicly expounding upon the impossibility of Edison Electric's current
producing a shock at about the same time that Edison was privately



124 / 

telling Charles Clarke that, yes, the company's workers had accidentally
spiked one of the electrical tubes in that spot, and the current was not
dissipated harmlessly through the earth, as Eaton was telling reporters
would be the case even had a rupture occurred.

The Edison Electric Light Company in 1882 launched a counter
offensive to direct public attention to its most vulnerable competitors:
the gas companies. The arc light companies could not be attacked with
out hurting the image of everyone in the electric power business; the lay
public could not readily distinguish between direct and alternating cur
rent. The threat to public safety posed by gas, however, was easily un
derstood. The Bulletin of the Edison Electric Light Company devoted
considerable space to reports of devastation and death caused by gas. A
man was found dead in his hotel room-with the gas turned on. Two

young girls found dead in bed-gassed. An explosion blew out heavy
plate glass from windows in a downtown office building-again, gas.
Standing alone in a room lit with gas was no different from standing
"immured with 23 other persons all taking oxygen from the atmo
sphere," according to the author of an article titled "How to Escape
Nervousness." After several hours of oxygen deprivation, was it a sur
prise that "your nerves should rebel as far as their weak state permits,
and that your head should ache, your hands tremble, and that your
daughter's playing on the piano almost drives you wild?"

Gaslight customers could appreciate the simple physical fact that an
electric light did not affect the quality of the air, nor generate heat in a
room. The gas industry, however, slyly instilled fear, uncertainty, and
doubt among customers who were considering an alternative. The pub
lic was warned that the electric light projected a toxic ray that would
turn the complexion of survivors green-and swell the death rate.
Those claims clashed with positive ones issued by entrepreneurs touting
the healthful benefits of electricity. An electric corset, for example, was
advertised that would "cause the wearer to grow plump and to enjoy
the very best of health.

"

The prospective advantages of replacing gaslights with electric ones
were clear enough to the warden of the Maryland state penitentiary in



 \ 125

Baltimore, who had seen the electric lights in the Menlo Park demon
stration and was eager to install them, "without any red tape," he

promised. This would have entailed installing a small power plant, like
the one serving the laboratory in Menlo Park or the company's office in
the brownstone on Fifth Avenue. Such installations, which Edison Elec
tric called "isolated lighting," did not help the company advance to
ward its strategic aim of building an electrical utility that served an
entire city, however. Edison asked that word be passed on to the state
penitentiary that his work was organized to build a complete system.
He acknowledged the paradox that "I could very much easier light up a
square mile with 1500 to 2000 houses than I could a single building."

One New York company, the lithograph firm of Hinds, Ketcham,
succeeded in buying its own power plant from Edison Electric. The elec
tric light was much superior to gaslight for work that required distin
guishing colors, and the firm provided a testimonial that the light was
"the best substitute for daylight we have ever known, and almost as
cheap." The Blue Mountain House, a hotel that sat thirty-five hundred
feet above sea level in the Adirondacks, got an Edison power plant, too.
Located forty miles from the nearest railroad, the machinery had to be
packed onto the backs of mules, and once installed the boilers were fed
by wood. With a printing firm grateful for the quality of the light, and
the resort hotel grateful for electric light of any form, these early instal
lations offered Edison Electric good references from customers less con
cerned about the economics than others would be.

Well before Edison's Pearl Street station was ready, Brush was selling
its arc lights to businesses for interior use, too, with power supplied from
its own central station. In December 1881, the only thing that kept
Brush from moving faster was a shortage of machinery needed to ex
pand its generating capacity. Its system in Manhattan supplied 550 lights,
outdoors and indoors, and could have supplied light to more offices if it
had had more power to distribute in the late afternoon and early
evening. In winter, its outdoor lights uptown along Broadway came on
while downtown offices were still open, creating peak demand for elec
tricity that exceeded the limited supply of power.



126 / 

While Brush was hampered by insufficient capacity and the gas com
panies were unable to persuasively portray electric light as intrinsically
more dangerous than their own, Edison Electric could have grabbed all
the business it could handle by responding to requests for lights pow
ered by on-site plants. In the three months following the Menlo Park
demonstrations, the company received three thousand to four thousand

separate applications-so many it had lost accurate count. Thomas
Edison's determination to spurn these opportunities to quickly commer
cialize the electric light, and instead to remain focused on the more dif
ficult, but ultimately more significant, task of launching his own central
power system, proved to be a brilliant stroke. It was not the result of
formal study, or broad consultation with his lieutenants. Instead, it was
an intuitive hunch that demonstrating the viability of a centralized sys
tem would be strategically more important to the business than accept
ing orders from individual customers.

The laying of the mains had begun in April 1881, but by December,
only one-third of the district had been wired. Work was slowed by
shortages of wire and the iron pipe through which it was threaded. Sup
pliers reneged on contracts signed before inflation had sent prices
higher, and Edison filed lawsuits to enlist the authority of the courts to
enforce the earlier agreements. In addition, the lines could advance only
at night because the city prohibited work during daylight hours so that
traffic would not be disrupted. Work stopped completely when winter
set in and the ground froze. Edison Electric had to issue a disappointing
announcement: Downtown would not be lighted until the spring.

Incandescent lighting did not hold the nation's interest during the
hard slog beneath New York's streets. For the city that sought the latest
lighting technology-and what city did not?-a new possibility had ap
peared the previous year: placing arc lights high enough to project an
intense light for many blocks in all directions. In Wabash, Indiana, four
enormous three-thousand-candlepower arc lights were suspended in
1880 from a flagstaff atop the courthouse. The light was said to be
bright enough to throw shadows of cows standing five miles away.
Other cities followed, mounting lights upon iron towers that rose hun-



 \ 127

dreds of feet above the central business district. In San Jose, California,
the publisher of the local newspaper raised cash contributions from the
general public for the erection of a four-legged, 237-foot monster of a
light tower, believed to be the tallest in the country. (Wild fowl crashed
into its upper structure and dropped into the street below, providing
an income supplement to police, who sold the birds to local restau
rants.) In Detroit, the Brush Electric Light Company built 142 masts,
each 200 feet high (and when it lost its contract with the city, refused
to turn them over to the successor contractor, which added another

100 towers to the blight). A British observer marveled at Americans'
tolerance for such breathtaking ugliness, "the most defiant appearance
of utter disregard for every other claim except utility."

The foreign observer did not understand the competitive metabolism
of local city boosters in America, determined to outhustle, outdo, out
build every other city. Wabash, the pioneer, bragged that it had earned
headlines like "Wabash Enjoys the Distinction of Being the Only City in
the World Entirely Lighted by Electricity." It was not just small three
thousand-person towns in the Midwest that regarded aerial lights as an
easy shortcut to electric lighting for a city. In Los Angeles, editorial
writers advocated construction of multiple light towers atop the hills
surrounding the city and provided poetic descriptions of the benefits.
The lights "shall search the roads, alleys and corners, the streets will be
safer and iniquity of all kinds will decrease. The brighter the light the
better for truth, purity and honor, and the worse for fraud and all that
fearful spawn of evil which flourishes in the darkness. Up then with the

graceful and generous towers!"
The towers in Los Angeles were never erected, averting certain disap

pointment. A source of powerful light mounted so high created a glow
that stretched in all directions, sufficient to cast shadows at great dis
tances, but not strong enough for the light to be of useful intensity.
When a history of Detroit that was published in 1923 looked back
upon the city's tower lights, which by then had been dismantled, it de
scribed them as "more spectacular than efficient."

The initial sensation they had stirred upon their introduction, however,



128 / 

had drawn attention away from Edison and his light. In a contest, in
candescent light could never match the sheer candlepower of arc light.
The only way Edison Electric could regain some attention for itself was
to come up with an entirely novel use of its low-candlepower light, a
feat accomplished by William Hammer, formerly the chief engineer of
the Edison Lamp Works and lately dispatched to London. In February
1882, Hammer unveiled at the Crystal Palace Electric Exhibition an
electrified sign. It was about ten feet in length, spelling out "Edison" in
foot-high letters, using about a dozen sixteen-candlepower bulbs for
each letter. By means of a hand-cranked drum that was out of sight, the
letters of "Edison" were illuminated, one by one, then all at the same
time. With this, Americans introduced to the world the first electrified
advertisement.

While work on Pearl Street was in progress, Edison was able to test

his newly designed electric light equipment in a full-scale, real-world
demonstration-in the heart of London. Along a half-mile route fol
lowing the Holborn Viaduct, streetlamps and interior lights in adjacent
hotels, restaurants, shops, and offices were installed, including in part
of the General Post Office. It was a technical success, impressed the
newspapers of Fleet Street, which were nearby, and provided valuable
experience that would be used in readying the Pearl Street system. But it
was merely a demonstration, not a commercial operation, and so could
not answer the critical question: Would Edison's centralized system of

supplying electricity for incandescent lighting be able to match the low
price of gas lighting?

Edison deployed a large battalion of canvassers to go house to house
in the Pearl Street district, noting the number of gas jets, the usual hours
of use, and their cost. He also learned which establishments had manu

facturing operations in which a motor could be applied. Within the dis
trict, the researchers found some eighty horses who provided motive
force by stepping on treadles in the top stories of buildings that they
were never permitted to leave until death. The locations of prospective
electricity customers were easier to determine, however, than the future



 \ 129

cost of delivering power to them, generated in an untested centralized
system likely to entail high distribution costs.

The passage of time did not serve to bolster the public's confidence in
Edison's system. In May 1882, when completion seemed too far off to
be within view, share prices of gas utilities advanced to great heights.
Edison was unable to remain silent. Concerned that he was losing the
public's support, Edison called in the newspaper reporters and pre
dicted that his system would within a few years completely eliminate
gas as a source of lighting. He was so confident that customers would
prefer his light, "better, cleaner, purer, and more wholesome," that he
could charge $1.50 for electric light equivalent to that produced by one
thousand cubic feet of gas, even if the gas companies lowered their price
to a penny.

Edison also boasted of his company's considerable experience in the
electric light business, pointing to the "isolated" site-based plants that
the company had tried its best to avoid building while the Pearl Street
project remained incomplete. The sheer volume of requests had worn
down Edison's resistance, and he had been least opposed to requests
that had come in from overseas. By agreeing to build and supply the
miniplants in places such as Italy, Austria, Finland, and Chile, Edison
Electric was able to quickly establish its name in far-flung locations. By
May 1882, two hundred of these small plants were in operation.

As engines of publicity, the miniplants potentially could most help
when they became highly sought after by the wealthy for use in their
own homes. This required, however, that they supply electric light with
out mishap. William Vanderbilt was the first to place an order for his own
personal power plant and lighting system for installation at his house
under construction on upper Fifth Avenue. Having seen the electric light
on display at Edison Electric's offices, Vanderbilt turned the responsibil
ities of general contractor over to his son-in-law, who was acquainted
with technical issues as the head of the telephone department of West
ern Union. Edison was present on the evening that the system was
turned on for the first time. The test went well, and Vanderbilt, his wife,



130/ 

and his daughters joined Edison in the main parlor, admiring the light.
Almost immediately, however, signs appeared of a smoldering fire
within the wallpaper, which apparently had a fine metallic thread in its
weave. Edison ordered the system shut down and was pleased that no
flames had appeared. Mrs. Vanderbilt, however, "became hysterical,"
according to Edison. She wanted to know where the fire had started.
The electrical plant in the cellar was described, but the more that was

explained, the more upset she became. She had not been told before
then that a boiler for the power plant had been installed in the house.
On her orders, the entire installation was removed.

The unhappy ending to this first installation swiftly became public
knowledge, and the gas utilities were glad to help spread the news. Edi
son did his best to minimize the problems that had been revealed. When
asked whether it was true that Vanderbilt had ordered Edison's electric

lights to be removed from his new house because they did not work
well-and had set fire to the woodwork-Edison declared, "It is false."
True, the lights had been removed, but they were not "our" lights, Edi
son maintained. "Our" lights will be those powered by the central sta
tion on Pearl Street. Mr. Vanderbilt had been so impatient, however,
that he had insisted on installation of an individual power plant, which
Edison appeared to disown. As for the report of a fire that had been
caused by the lights, this, too, Edison tried to spin to his advantage. He
told a reporter that one of the electric light wires had come in contact
with a burglar-alarm wire, become overheated, and charred a few gold
thread wires in the cloth wallpaper, nothing more.

Undeterred by Vanderbilt's unhappy experience, J. P. Morgan wanted
Edison to build a system of lights and self-contained power plant for his
house, too, at 219 Madison Avenue. He directed that the plant be in
stalled at a distance, however, in a cellar excavated for this purpose be
neath the stables, which were at the rear of the property. A subterranean
conduit, built of brick, ran from the plant to the house and wires were
run through the gas conduits. The power plant was staffed with its own
full-time engineer, who came on duty at 3:00 P.M. and fired up the
boilers so power would be ready by 4:00. He completed his shift at



 \ 131

11 :00 P.M., a fact the members of the Morgan household sometimes

forgot when the house was plunged into darkness in the middle of a
late-evening card game.

The generating plant was situated far enough from the main house of
the Morgan property that its presence did not annoy members of the
household-the Morgan household, that is. Near the Morgan stables
was the house of Mr. and Mrs. James Brown, however, and Mrs. Brown

complained that the vibrations of the dynamo made her house shake.
Pierpoint Morgan had rubber pads installed beneath the machinery and
sandbags placed along the walls of the cellar to reduce the noise and vi
brations, appeasing Mrs. Brown only somewhat. Fumes and smoke, she
said, were penetrating her house and tarnishing her silver. Noise pollu
tion in the neighborhood returned when stray cats in the neighborhood
discovered a toasty place to gather and yowl in the winter: on the con
duit that ran between the power plant and the Morgan house.

Morgan prized being ahead of everyone else, and the next year was
concerned that his plant was already less than state of the art, a suspi
cion that was confirmed when he persuaded Edison to send Edward
Johnson to the house for an evaluation. Johnson was instructed to up
grade the equipment and also to devise a way to provide an electric light
that would sit on Morgan's desk in his library. At a time when the very
concept of an electrical outlet and detachable electrical appliances had
yet to appear, this posed a significant challenge. Johnson's solution was
to run wires beneath the floor to metal plates that were installed in dif
ferent places beneath the rugs. One of the legs of the desk was equipped
with sharp metal prongs, designed to make contact with one of the
plates when moved about the room.

In conception, it was clever; in implementation, it fell short of ideal. On
the first evening when the light was turned on, there was a flash, followed
by a fire that quickly engulfed the desk and spread across the rug before
being put out. When Johnson was summoned to the house the next morn
ing, he was shown into the library, where charred debris was piled in a
heap. He expected that when Morgan appeared, he would angrily an
nounce that the services of Edison Electric were no longer needed.



132 / 

"Well?" Morgan stood in the doorway, with Mrs. Morgan standing
behind him, signaling Johnson with a finger across her lips not to
launch into elaborate explanations. Johnson cast a doleful eye at the
disaster in the room and remained silent.

"Well, what are you going to do about it?" Morgan asked. Johnson
said the fault was his own and that he would personally reinstall every
thing, ensuring that it would be done properly.

"All right. See that you do." Morgan turned and left. The eager pur
chaser of first-generation technology handled setbacks with equanimity.
"I hope that the Edison Company appreciates the value of my house as
an experimental station," he would later say. A new installation with
second-generation equipment worked well, and Morgan held a recep
tion for four hundred guests to show off his electric lights. The event led
some guests to place their own orders for similar installations. Morgan
also donated entire systems to St. George's Church and to a private
school, dispatching Johnson to oversee the installation as a surprise to
the headmistress. The family biographer compared Morgan's gifts of
electrical power plants to his sending friends baskets of choice fruit.

Every such gift basket sent by Morgan represented a mix of good and
bad news for his supplier, Edison Electric. Keeping its most important
investor happy was good; diffusing the company name into places likely
to impress influential individuals was also good. But the self-contained
plants were a distraction that required a diversion of precious talent
and diffusion of focus while the main project, the centralized station at
Pearl Street, was still unfinished. Outside of the New York City area,
Edison Electric had obtained contracts to build centralized systems in

other municipalities whose officials were willing to believe that the
technology had been proven adequate in the demonstrations, without
waiting for the real-world test in New York. In Appleton, Wisconsin,
for example, the lighting system had been purchased by a local industri
alist who was so thoroughly sold on the technology during a fishing trip
with an Edison salesman that he had placed an order without even see
ing a demonstration. It could have been ready for operation before New
York's Pearl Street, but Edison forbade its operators from progressing



 \ 133

beyond the test stage so that Pearl Street would receive the publicity
from being first.

By August 1882, the underground conductors for the Pearl Street dis
trict were in place, and all that remained was to connect the street mains
with the individual buildings, rewire the interior fixtures, and install
meters. The very last step was the inspection of each customer's prem
ises by the city's Board of Underwriters, a slow process as it had only
one inspector. Kinks in the system were ironed out by tests that covered
different portions of the district. By the end of the month, service to a
few customers had begun unofficially. Though not all portions of the
district had received underwriter approval, Edison decided the time had
arrived for an official beginning. On the afternoon of 4 September
1882, he, Bergmann, Kruesi, and a few other Edison Electric staff mem
bers went to the offices of J. P. Morgan in the Drexel Building at Broad
and Wall Streets. At 3:00 P.M., a switch was ceremoniously thrown, and
Edison's electric lights came to life.

No throng of reporters was on hand to commemorate the event. It re
ceived the most complete coverage from the New York Times, but that
was to be expected: The Times itself received service in the Times Build
ing for the first time-a long-anticipated dividend from Edison's decision
to place the first central station where it was. The light was described as
superior to that of gas by "men who have battered their eyes sufficiently
by years of night work to know the good and bad points of a lamp,"
said the Times. The comparison between electric and gaslight favored
the former, but the differences were subtle. The shades on the electric

light fixtures made them resemble gas fixtures, and "nine people out of
ten would not have known the rooms were lighted by electricity, except
that the light was more brilliant and a hundred times steadier." The
newspaper had not fully committed to switching to electric lights-only
fifty-two of a possible four hundred or so lights in the building had been
electrified-so the first evening of service did not mark a clean, dra
matic beginning of a new era.

The official beginning was covered more objectively by the New York
Herald, which itself used five hundred incandescent bulbs in its offices



134 / 

in the evening, but these were supplied by power from its own plant, the
largest on-site power plant in the city. Its report was a positive one, not
ing that the Pearl Street machinery worked well and about three thou
sand Edison Electric customers were ready to receive service, out of five
thousand when all of the installations in the district were completed.
Some customers were "a trifle disappointed at first" when they saw the
soft electric light, but supposedly soon realized that a softer light was
best for interior lighting and would be easiest on the eyes.

The Herald reporter portrayed the moment as a satisfying denoue
ment to a long-running drama involving unfulfilled promises and a loud
chorus of skeptics. After recounting the various difficulties that had
slowed the realization of the vision, the story said "many people shook
their heads at [the] failure of the promised radiance and believed some
thing was amiss." Edison and his company had persevered nonetheless
and now "the Edison light had a very fair degree of success." This was
the most generous review that the new service received.

The launch of commercial service was not criticized so much as it

was greeted with a yawn. It was not regarded by contemporaries as
the red-letter date in the history of progress that would be featured
in the textbooks assigned to later generations. Most of those people
who the Herald said had shaken their heads skeptically no longer took
an interest in the venture. It had taken four long years after Edison's an
nouncement in 1878 about inventing a new electric light to bring the
complete system into operation. By 1882, the flighty public had moved
on to other diversions. The technical community had had their doubts
about the feasibility of the system, but demonstrations and awards in
London and Paris had eliminated their interest at the same time that the

doubts were removed. The only group that had cause to pay close atten
tion was the small group of Edison Electric investors, and they could
not yet relax because they still did not know whether this novel system
would turn out to be profitable.

At the time of the first announcement in 1878, Edison had painted a
picture of electric lights in houses that also included electric meters. After
a few weeks of experiments, Edison had declared that he did not think it



 \ 135

necessary to measure the amount of electricity used; he proposed instead
a simpler system, charging a flat rate for every light fixture (which he
anachronistically referred to as a "burner"). "If I find that this works an
injustice," he said, "why I shall try to get up a meter, but I fear it will be
very hard to do it." Planning for flat-rate pricing had ended almost im
mediately, however, and he returned to working on a chemical meter.
Reading the meter involved removing a metal plate and taking it to the
central station to be weighed-measuring the quantity of zinc that had
been deposited on it indicated the amount of current that had passed
through. Characteristically, Edison announced that he had completed
work on the meter well before he actually had. But his design eventually
did turn out well; the mechanism was simple and accurate. To ensure
that it worked well in winter, too, a lightbulb was added below the
bottles that held the chemical solution, providing heat to keep them from
freezing. The only shortcoming of the chemical meter, and it was not a
small one, was that the customer could not verify its accuracy and had to
trust the company that its reading was correct.

Edison Electric did not charge for its service the first four months. Its
initial customers were treated to a beta test, offered without charge while
bugs were identified and eliminated. Short circuits were difficult to track
down, especially in the underground feeders. Often employees at the sta
tion had no way of identifying the location of the problem, other than to
walk the streets, looking for smoke coming up from the paving stones.

Edison Electric had done everything it could to make it easy for
prospective customers in its Pearl Street district to switch from gas to
electric lighting. It had wired the homes and businesses of its customers
for free, and provided bulbs without charge. It also guaranteed that its
electric lights would be cheaper than gas. Still, it proved difficult to en
list the cautious prospects who had not signed up before service started.
Some customers seemed to Edison determined to "prevaricate" when

demanding discounted rates, claiming that their electricity bill was
greater than their gas bill had been.

Some of the early customers expressed appreciation of Edison Elec
tric's inaugural service. One such customer in the liquor business put in



136 / 

an order for 250 lights, placing one light in each of 250 barrels of cheap
whiskey, believing that the light took "the shudder out of it." He was
always prompt in paying his bill.

J. P. Morgan was not so cheerful about his own bill, however. He

complained to Edison that the meter was inaccurate, favoring Edison
Electric. Edison was unwilling to concede any problem with his meter
and outlined a method of checking its accuracy, to which Morgan
agreed. Cards were printed and hung on every fixture in Drexel, Mor
gan and Company's offices, which noted the number of bulbs in each
fixture and the time they were to be turned on and off each day. At the
end of the month, a clerk collected the cards and calculated the total
number of lamp hours consumed. When the number was compared with
the bill, the results confirmed the overcharge. Morgan was happy, Edi
son was not. Edison suggested that they continue the test for a second
month. When it yielded similar results, he was nonplussed. Determined
to uncover a problem at Drexel, Edison visited the offices, inspected the
wires and fixtures, and reviewed the cards recording usage. He then
asked that the janitor be summoned. Upon questioning him, Edison dis
covered that he used the electric lights while he worked but did not
record the hours-no one had asked him to. The test was run another

month, with the janitor's participation. With his hours added to the
total, the calculated sum came within a few cents of the amount based

upon the meter. Morgan was said to have been pleased to find that the
meter stood up better to interrogation than others whom he suspected
of bilking him.

The story-a parable-was retold with pride many times by Edison
and his associates. The lesson it was intended to impart was that Edison
Electric had begun its service in an exemplary way. The system worked,
and worked well. Judged on its technical merits, the accomplishment
was no less than what the company claimed. But as a business that in

tended to operate in the black, it was less impressive. For once, this
could not be blamed on Edison's inattention to business considerations.

He had not pursued the light for the sake of intellectual curiosity; his in
terest in electric light was nakedly commercial. He had entered the field



 \ 137

because of his belief that he could produce a profitable service superior
to gas and to the other electric light entrepreneurs. Prior to the start of
Pearl Street's service, he could only estimate and guess and hope, filling
notebooks with speculative figures. The definitive answers could be ob
tained only when real customers paid real money for what he offered.
The initial data produced by actual service were disappointing. At the
time the company began assessing charges, it had a modest number of
231 customers. It operated at a loss.

Before the switch had been thrown at the Pearl Street station in

1882, Edison had been consumed with the work, technical and non
technical, necessary to launch the service. But with consummation of
the goal, and with it, the conquering of the major technical challenges,
his psychological state changed just enough to break his concentration.
He had said the previous year that he planned to begin work "immedi
ately" on a second district in Manhattan, bounded by Twenty-fourth
and Thirty-fourth Streets, excited at the thought of supplying electricity
that would replace not only forty-two thousand gas jets but would also
power forty-four hundred sewing machines. But he had not started
work on it then, nor could he do so when Pearl Street service began, not
when the business had yet to be proven as sound as the technology
upon which it was based.

Edison had launched the service believing he could move easily be
tween laboratory and front office, going wherever outstanding prob
lems needed his attention. Two months after Edison Electric began
collecting from its first customers, Edison told a reporter that he was
going "to be simply a business man for a year," taking a "long vaca
tion" from inventing. And when he did return to the lab, he said, he
would give his attention wholly to electricity; "no more phonographs
or things of that kind."

Acting as "simply a business man" did not satisfy him, however, nor
could he take pride in seeing the company prosper. After a year, Pearl
Street had merely doubled its customer base to 455 and was still running
at a loss. To Edison's credit, he acknowledged the necessity of bringing
in a professional manager, offering Charles Chinnock $10,000 if he



138 / 

succeeded in making the Pearl Street operation profitable. Chinnock was
able to do so within the second year of operation. According to company
legend, Edison paid Chinnock the promised bonus out of his own pocket.

Expansion in New York proceeded slowly. The uptown station that
Edison the year before had claimed that he was about to begin work on
was not constructed that year, or the year after. The second district,
based at a station on Twenty-sixth Street, did not commence service
until 1888, six years later. Coverage in the original downtown district
was not expanded until 1891.

Outside of New York, Edison Electric sold a smattering of central

power systems to small towns, but these did not serve as showcases.

The second plant opened was the one hastily built in Appleton, Wiscon
sin, by the licensee who made his riskiest investment decisions while
fishing. It was the nation's first hydropower plant, but lacked volt
meters, ammeters, lightning protection, and fuses. Its poorly insulated
wires shorted out frequently; its managers were unacquainted with cost
accounting and set rates below cost. Operating expenses were paid for
by ongoing issuance of company stock.

Six months after the start of business at Pearl Street, Edison Electric
had failed to convert its establishment of central service in New York

into a base for a growing business that sold similar systems to other

large cities. The only line of products that sold well were the ones that
Edison disdained, the on-site power plants. The company had sold more
than 330 plants, some of which were larger than those installed in cen
tral stations. Edison Electric's backers, who had waited patiently for
four years and were now eager to see a return on their investment, urged
Edison to promote the product line that customers were most interested
in, the on-site plants. Edison sought vindication of his belief that cen
tralized power generation was superior to distributed generation, but
he acknowledged that here, too, he needed help to make a success of
the central-station business. He appointed his own personal secretary,
twenty-three-year-old Samuel Insull, to take charge of the campaign. In
sull had immigrated from England two years before to work for Edison,



 \ 139

and his employer had come to view him as indispensable. In his new po
sition, Insull quickly closed sales in small towns in Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Massachusetts, and New York.

For Edison's grandly conceived central stations, this was as good as it
would get, it appeared: success gained one sale at a time, each on an ex
ceedingly modest scale. He had the patience for a long campaign, if it
were technical in nature. But for the slow process of winning customers,
he was not well suited temperamentally. He needed technical mysteries
and skeptical onlookers and drama. He was an impatient spectator, as
when he was invited to Boston to attend a special performance at the
Bijou Theatre, marking the debut of its newly installed electric light sys
tem. In the course of installing the new lights the theater had taken the
daring step of removing the backup system, its gas fixtures. Power was
supplied by a neighboring printer, which had installed the largest on-site
power plant in the country. The governor was in attendance, and Edison
brought along his closest associates, including Johnson, Bergmann, and
InsulI, all of whom arrived in formal evening dress. The performance
began and all seemed well at first. Then Edison noticed that the stage
lights were growing progressively dimmer. He and Johnson left their seats
to investigate. At the printer's, they discovered that the boilerman had
been absorbed in repairing a steam leak, neglecting the boiler fire. When
other members of the Edison Electric delegation arrived to see what was
the matter, they found Edison and Johnson shoveling coal into the fire
box. When the fire was stoked, they picked up their swallow-tailed coats
and high hats and returned for the remainder of the performance.

The grander the scale of Edison's ambitions, and the greater the skepti
cism that he had had to overcome, the happier he had been. Once the
electric light had been introduced, however, he found himself in a difficult
position. How could he possibly sustain the pace of accomplishments of
the previous five years? He could not shrug off the expectation that the
Wizard of Menlo Park could accomplish anything. He was thirty-five
years old, and the rest of his long life was devoted to attempts to make the
inspiration that brought the phonograph and the electric light return.



 



PART II

1883-1931



 



CHAPTER SEVEN



THE
MAN WHOSE public image was of a wizard who could con

jure whatever he wished faced daily at home his actual power
lessness: He could not make his wife well. She was plagued by

headaches, panic attacks, and severe fatigue. In the summer of 1884,
she insisted that the family move from their New York apartment at
Gramercy Park back to the family house at Menlo Park. She died there
on 9 August 1884, at the age of twenty-nine, succumbing to what her
doctor termed "congestion of the brain."

Edison was not prepared. His daughter Marion would later recall the
image of her father "shaking with grief, weeping and sobbing so he
could hardly tell me that Mother had died in the night." Mary's mother,
Margaret, had already become the principal care-providing adult for the
three Edison children. After Mary's death, the two younger boys, Tom
and Will, did not spend time with their father, but their daughter Mar
ion, who was now twelve, became Edison's constant companion. He re
moved her from Madam Mears's Madison Avenue French Academy and
continued her education at home. The curriculum was simple: He had
her read ten pages daily from an encyclopedia. This freed her to accom
pany her father on horse rides, or visits to the theater. She also attended
board meetings of the Edison Electric Light Company and stayed with
her father until the wee hours of the morning at Delmonico's.

Professionally, Edison was drifting, without an all-consuming project
to blot out everything but the work itself. The electric light no longer

143



144 / 

needed him, and he did not know what to do with himself. Mercifully,
his floundering took place out of public view, as newspapers and maga
zines had swiftly lost interest in him. His boast that electric lighting
would replace gas lighting in homes had been more credible before
Pearl Street had begun its service on a modest scale. A book about
prominent New Yorkers that appeared that year noted how swiftly his
public image had flipped, from that of a prodigy to a failure, an illustra
tion of "the fitfulness of the fever of fame."

Electric light had become more of a curiosity than an epoch-defining
change. It was used to add novelty one evening to a parade sponsored by
the Blaine-Logan presidential campaign of 1884. With Edison's bless
ing, Edward Johnson and Charles Batchelor designed helmets equipped
with lights that were worn by Edison Electric Light employees who
marched down Madison Avenue on behalf of Blaine. Each marcher was

connected by wires to a portable generating plant that accompanied the
group, along with supporting coal and water carts for the steam engine.

In Philadelphia, the light-equipped helmets were put to another use
when Edison's company presented to the public the "Edison Darkey."
This was the name given in a caption in Scientific American to the African
American men who were hired to hand out flyers at the 1884 Philadel
phia Electrical Exhibition. They wore helmets that were wired to copper
spikes on the heels of their shoes and drew power from electrified cop
per strips placed on the floor of the hall. One report said that they drew
crowds of such size that their movement in the hall became impossible.

For a technology story to be interesting to the lay public, novelty was
a prerequisite, and that became ever harder to supply. Longtime Edison
associate William Hammer succeeded in garnering attention for a New
Year's Eve "electrical dinner" that he threw for guests at his home. Elec

tricity was used throughout, beginning with invitations that had been
written with an Edison electric pen. At Hammer's house, the approach of
a guest on the steps sent electrical signals that lit the veranda, rang the
doorbell, and swung open the front door. Electricity supplied the power
for self-operating bells, alarms, telephones, cigar lighters, phonographs,



\ 145

fans, musical instruments, and a lemonade pitcher equipped to deliver a
nonlethal shock to the unwary person who picked it up, and other cu
riosities that served to give the house a haunted feel. "It seemed unsafe to
sit down anywhere," said one visitor. The party was intended to provide
guests with a peek into the future, as if "they had been living half a cen
tury ahead of the new year.

"

Even a good technology story, however, can never match the appeal of
a good financial scandal. In 1885, John Roach, the shipbuilder who had
worked with Edison to outfit the Columbia, tumbled into financial ruin
and public humiliation. Roach had once been the preeminent shipbuilder
in the country but had become overextended. It was he who later had

leased to Edison the building in Lower Manhattan that Edison used to es
tablish the Edison Machine Works. Edison was appalled by the callous
mistreatment of Roach by his creditors. Roach was a fellow self-made
man, who had been responsible for "feeding innumerable families," and
was deserving of respect, not persecution. Edison wrote privately, "For
people who hound such men as these I would invent a special Hades. I
would stricken [sic] them with the chronic sciatic neuralgia and cause
them to wander forever stark naked with the arctic circle. "

Reading a headline such as "John Roach Embarrassed" in the New
York Times must have given Edison a scare about his own situation.

Just a year before, his own pinched finances had forced him to ask for
Roach's indulgence when Edison failed to pay rent on the Machine
Works property. Edison blamed tardy payments from his foreign cus
tomers and his own costly experimental work. "I am desirous you
should do me this favor," he wrote Roach.

At the time of Roach's financial collapse in 1885, one newspaper
published rumors that Edison was himself financially hard-pressed.
Neither Edison nor his associates deigned to publicly respond, but they
did not need to. William Croffut, the reporter who had written many
fawning articles about Edison over the years, wrote a piece claiming
"personally to know that Mr. Edison is to-day what most people would
call a rich man."



146 / 

The investors in Edison's Electric Light Company, however, did not
feel rich. They were grumbling that the price of the company's shares
had tumbled to levels that were a fifth or a sixth their peak value, at
tained when Edison's electric light existed only as an announcement and
long before it was introduced as reality. In 1885, three years after the
start of service at Pearl Street, a director of the company who chose to
remain anonymous complained to the Philadelphia Press that Edison
insisted on taking an active part in the management of the company
"although he is not a bit of a business man." He gave an example of
Edison's poor judgment: Edison had proposed installing a new cable in
Manhattan that would cost nearly $30,000 a mile, oblivious to the fact
that Western Union had one with similar capacity in operation that had

only cost $500 a mile. "If he would leave it to practical business men to
make money out of it and stick to his inventions," the director said,
"the company would in time become very rich."

For Edison, "sticking to his inventions" full-time would mean relin
quishing control of Edison Electric, which was anathema. Managing his
company did not engage him half as much as creating it, but he could
not bring himself to let go of the captain's chair. Edison's intellectual in
terests, however, wandered from one minor project to the next. He had

always done best when attempting something both entirely new and gar
gantuan in scale, but in the mid-1880s he could not find a suitable

project. Around this time he asked his old friend Ezra Gilliland, who was
a senior executive at the American Bell Telephone Company, what he
should work on now that the electric light was "practically" out of his
hands. Gilliland suggested that he return to the phonograph and make it
"a practical instrument," but Edison was unable to muster interest. An
alternative area that Gilliland mentioned, train-based telegraphy, did not
address a potential mass market of comparable size, but Gilliland had
done work in this area himself and Edison leaped at the idea.

In short order the two men founded the Railway Telegraph and Tele
phone Company, and Edison tinkered in a small lab he set up on Av
enue B. William Croffut obligingly offered "the Wizard Edison" the
opportunity to publicly tout his latest enthusiasm without waiting to



\ 147

put laboratory work to a test in the real world. The article was based
solely on one visit to Edison's lab-and on what Edison said about his
work, uncomplicated by independent verification. Pointing to a long
board covered in tinfoil and suspended from the ceiling with ropes, Edi
son said that the device permitted him to "make electricity jump 35 feet
through the air, carrying the message without spilling it." The plan
would be to install foil-covered boards lengthwise atop railcars so that
telegrams could be sent and received by trains while passing by stations
without stopping.

After Croffut's puff piece appeared, Edison directed Samuel Insull to
send Croffut fifty shares of the Railroad Telegraph company. Even
judged by the looser journalistic ethics of that day, the gift was appar
ently deemed best delivered outside of the office (it was sent to Croffut's
home). In his note of thanks to Insull, Croffut wrote, "That's what you
wanted my private address for, is it, you rogue?" He asked Insull to pass
on his appreciation to "Mr. Edison for his continual kindness."

Edison had sent the shares with the message that they "may be worth
something some day." The new technology did not work well, however,
and the company's prospects diminished accordingly before "some
day" could arrive. Put simply, the company was headed toward obliv
ion. Insull soon concluded that its prospective customers, the railroad

companies, were unlikely to "adopt it with much of a 'rush'" and tried
to unload his own allocation of shares at a decent price, urging Edison
to do the same.

The Railroad Telegraph did not occupy Edison the way that Pearl
Street had in the years before service was launched in 1882. Now, noth

ing in his life did so. He wanted a wifely helpmate, and it is this that
commanded his attention more than anything else the year following
Mary's death. Ezra Gilliland, and his wife, Lillian, would be a great help
to Edison in this quest.

In February 1885, Edison had traveled to New Orleans to visit the
World's Industrial and Cotton Centennial Exposition. A world's fair was



148 / 

a splendid place to show one's wares, and Edison Electric had obtained
the coveted contract to illuminate the fair's main building, which covered
thirty-three acres and was said to be the largest wooden structure in the
world. While in New Orleans, thirty-eight-year-old Edison met nineteen
year-old Mina Miller, daughter of Lewis Miller, an Ohio industrialist
whose agricultural machinery was on exhibit. Miss Miller had graduated
from a Boston seminary the year before and while a student had been a

frequent guest at the Gillilands' home. (The circumstantial evidence sug
gests that Edison met the Millers, father and daughter, in New Orleans
by the matchmaking designs of the Gillilands.)

The Gillilands had a summer house on the north shore of Boston Bay,
which served as a place for Edison to tryout a new sociable persona in
the summer of 1885. Edison invited Insull, who was also single, to
come up and join the group: "There is [sic] lots [of] pretty girls." Edison
himself had already fixed upon Miller as his choice for future wife, and
Miller was spending the summer not on Boston Bay but with her par
ents at the Chautauqua Institution, on Chautauqua Lake, New York
the very place Edison had been scheduled in 1878 to present a talk
before he canceled and fled on his trip west.

Chautauqua had been founded by two people. One was John Vincent,
the insufferably self-important person who had pressed his uninvited
opinions too hard on Edison in the early days of the phonograph. The
other cofounder was Lewis Miller, Mina's father. In 1885, Edison under
stood that Mina Miller was bound closely to Chautauqua, and he would
have to make an appearance there during the summer program.

Edison spent the weeks preceding his first Chautauqua visit at the
Gillilands' to get comfortable with the new version of himself that he

was trying on: a gregarious bon vivant, uninterested in work, filling
summer days with frivolous entertainments such as boat rides, card

games, and a variation of Truth or Dare for middle-aged participants.
He seriously considered buying a yacht, before he came to the realiza
tion that his self-transformation was still incomplete-he recognized
that he still lacked the ability to disregard the frightful expense.



\ 149

One of the pastimes organized by the Gillilands was having the
guests maintain individual diaries, which were to be passed around
among the guests for the entertainment of the group. Edison was will

ing to go along, making entries for ten consecutive days in July 1885.
The calligraphy is impeccable and the grammar without fault, suggest
ing the final version of writing had passed through at least one prelimi
nary draft. The entries provide a window into what Thomas Edison
wanted others-in particular, Mina Miller-to see as his inner feelings.
The first entry established that Miller was the very first object of his
thoughts upon waking that day; a later entry claimed that "it would
stagger the mind of Raphael in a dream to imagine a being comparable
to the Maid of Chautauqua."

Edison reported that his daughter Marion invited him one day to toss
a ball with her for the first game of catch he had played in his life. His
receptiveness to new experiences extends to accepting the dress code of

polite society-he wore a clean, starched white shirt, explaining that he
submitted out of fear of the disapproval of Mrs. Gilliland. He picks up
a book by Hawthorne but fails to be engaged, the reaction to be ex
pected, he self-mockingly says, of a "literary barbarian."

In a newspaper Edison read of two suicides, which he describes in his

diary with cold eyes: "Among the million of perfected mortals on Man
hattan Island two of them took it into their heads to cut their navel cord

from mother earth and be born into a new world." The sarcasm works

to better effect in his description of a clerk he encountered when he
went into town on errands: "A drug store nowadays seems [to be ... ]
in the charge of a young man with a hatchet-shaped head, hair laid out
by a civil engineer, and a blank stare of mediocrity on his face."

Edison's trip into town had come close to being fatal, he says in the
diary, because he "got thinking about Mina and came near being run
over by a street car." He further embellishes the tale: "If Mina interferes
much more will have to take out an accident policy." Though he did not
address Mina directly, he knew that she would soon read what he wrote,
and clumsily joked about marriage. When Marion showed her father her



ISO/

notes for a novel she was planning to write that touched upon the subject
of matrimony, Edison writes that he told her "in case of a marriage to

put in bucketfuls of misery; this would make it realistic."
Marion Edison could see that her father, joking aside, would soon

marry again, and her stepmother would be the person whom her father
was incessantly talking about and who was only seven years older than
herself. In his diary, Edison thinks Marion's jealousy of Mina, whom he
regards as "the yardstick of perfection," was quite amusing. He writes
that Marion "threatens to become an incipient Lucretia Borgia."

In August, the Edisons and the Gillilands traveled to Chautauqua
and spent a week with the Millers. Edison did not possess the religiosity
of Lewis Miller, but the two men did share experience as commercially
minded inventors. Miller had experience, too, as a publicly known fig
ure, more so for his work for the Chautauqua Institution than as a prin
cipal in an agricultural machinery firm. Edison had noticed earlier that
summer that when he picked up a business bestseller titled How Success
Is Won, both he and Miller were mentioned. (At the time, Miller would
have been the wealthier of the two men. A contemporary newspaper

placed his net worth at $2 million, or about $38 million in today's
dollars.)

The first meeting went well enough for Mina Miller to receive her
parents' permission to accompany Edison, Marion, and the Gillilands
as they traveled farther upstate in New York and then over to the White
Mountains of New Hampshire. Looking back on the trip years later,
Edison recalled it as a time in which he and Mina enjoyed an intimate
privacy while in the same carriage as the three others. He had taught
Mina how to use Morse code as a private language tapped out on the
hand of the other person. Private endearments were exchanged in the
carriage without risk of being overheard. A story from family lore is
that Edison was sitting in the Gilliland family parlor with a number of
other people present when Mina suddenly stood up and rushed upstairs
without saying a word. Concerned about her sudden exit, Lillian
Gilliland went up after her. "What in the name of goodness is the mat
ter?" she had asked. Mina said, "Why, Mr. Edison has just proposed to



\ 151

me across the living room floor." This version of the story does not
make clear how Miller had responded at the time, but Edison said that
Miller tapped back, "Yes." He would retell the story many times to il
lustrate why he regarded his deafness as a help in winning Mina as his
wife. "If she had been obliged to speak it," Edison speculated, "she
might have found it harder."

Upon returning home, Edison formally wrote Mina's father seeking his
approval of the marriage. Seeking to show that he was a suitable, sober
husband-to-be, he referred to his professional accomplishments-and
fame-as his qualifications. "I trust you will not accuse me of egotism
when 1 say that my life and history and standing are so well known as to
call for no statement concerning myself." Edison probably sounded more
presumptuous than he intended when he closed, "I trust my suit will
meet with your approval." Miller received the letter happily, invited
Edison to visit the family home in Ohio, and bestowed his blessings on
the couple.

The wedding was held at the Miller home in Akron in February
1886. Reporters were present not only at the wedding but also on the
train trip south to the honeymoon in Florida. Edison showed off his ir
repressible nature as the inventor who never goes on holiday, telling the
New York World midjourney that he had just been inspired to sketch
out the design of a machine that "will pick cotton without trouble."
When Edison had first become famous almost ten years previously, he
had been complimented with mock editorials calling for action to stop
the flow of his inventions; now, Edison was playing to his audience,
showing off his legendary mind that could not be switched off, even
when traveling with his new bride.

Mina Edison, who still was only twenty years old, did not register a
complaint about having to compete with the mechanical cotton picker
for Edison's attention. From the beginning of her marriage, she was
Mrs. Edison, wholeheartedly devoted to helping her husband, the in
ventor. While they stayed in Fort Myers, Florida, where Edison and
Gilliland had recently purchased adjacent lots and put up vacation
houses, Edison shared his unceasing brainstorms with her. His new



152 / 

ideas were recorded in notebooks, each entry dated and signed first
"TAE," then "Mina." When they returned home, she commuted daily
with Edison for a brief time to his laboratory at the lightbulb factory
and assisted in experiments there.

Mina Edison's work at the lab workbench did not last much longer
than had Mary Edison's, but the domestic arrangement that succeeded
it would turn out to be durable for decades. Edison was the inventor,
Mrs. Edison the household manager whose responsibility was to keep
her husband insulated from distractions. Later, after almost forty years
of marriage to the man whom a clever magazine editor referred to as
"the most difficult husband in America," Mina described her auxiliary
role without a hint of complaint: "We have always put his work first, all
of us. And we have tried to organize our home and our home life to give
results just as much as the laboratory."

When Edison and Mina were engaged, Edison offered her a choice of
two houses: one in Manhattan on Riverside Drive, the other in a suburb
in New Jersey. She weighed the advantages and disadvantages of each
by considering which location would be most ideal for Edison's creative
work, quiet and free from interruption by visitors. She chose the subur
ban house, and there she would preside as the chief executive of the
household for the duration of his and her lives.

The house Edison purchased was a twenty-three-room Queen Anne
style mansion. It was set amid thirteen and a half sylvan acres in
Llewellyn Park, in West Orange, New Jersey, a stunningly beautiful
planned suburban community, the country's first. The house had been
built and occupied by Henry Pedder, a department store clerk with a
modest salary who had discovered that he could afford the good life by
embezzling funds from his employer. His bookkeeping exploits had
been exposed two years before. When arrested, he promptly turned
over title to the property to his employer as partial restitution. The
house remained unoccupied but just as it had been, stuffed with Ped
der's furniture. The real estate agent who spoke with Edison estimated
the combined value of the house and furnishings at $400,000, and ini
tially offered it to Edison for half that if he wished to purchase it fur-



\ 153

nished. Here was a large estate with collections of exquisite art and fur
niture and a five-thousand-volume library, the product of ten years of
what Edison admired as "enthusiastic study and effort," available at
half price-or less. So eager was the department store to unload the
property that it eventually lowered its asking price to $125,000. After
Mina had made it her choice, Edison took pains to say publicly that he
himself was not interested in its luxury. "It is a great deal too nice for
me," he said, "but it isn't half nice enough for my little wife here." The
Edisons would call their estate Glenmont.

Edison could have viewed the house as an exhibition space to be used

for semipublic demonstrations of the fruits of his latest experiments,
just as his own associate William Hammer had done with his all-electric
house. Edison, however, took little interest in using his own home in
this way. Chandeliers had gas burners as well as electrical bulbs. Speak
ing tubes-interconnected pipes like those used in ships-served as the
house's unelectrified intercom system. ("They don't break down," a
member of Edison's family would later say in the electronic era.)

Edison found himself with a new home, a new wife, and he would
have another daughter, Madeleine, and two sons, Charles and Theodore,
who followed. (This matched the pattern of his three children from his
first marriage: daughter, Marion, followed by two sons, Thomas and
Will.) What he still lacked, however, was the dream laboratory, one that
would exceed the humble dimensions of the one he had abandoned in

Menlo Park when he moved to New York City to install his first electric

light system. His plan was to provide himself with the means to recap
ture the magic of Menlo Park, which he was already viewing through
the gauze of nostalgia. He wrote in his diary, "Everything succeeded in
that old laboratory." The limitations of its equipment had not pre
vented him from enjoying his two biggest triumphs in invention, the
phonograph and the electric light. But he thought he could accomplish
even greater feats in better appointed surroundings. By building a new
lab from scratch that was state of the art, he could tackle any and every
kind of problem that struck his fancy and surpass his previous entries in
the annals of invention.



154 / 

The five-building complex for which he drew up plans would be the
largest and best-equipped industrial laboratory in the world. He picked
out a site in Orange, New Jersey, a short distance from Glenmont in

Llewellyn Park. The three-story main building would extend 250 feet in
length and include a machine shop staffed with fifty machinists at the
ready waiting for his instructions, a stockroom that would have "every
conceivable material of every size," and an enormous library with
shelves extending from the floor to the 40-feet-high ceiling. The remain
ing buildings would house specialized labs. In Edison's mind, the com
plex would enable him to "build anything, from a lady's watch to a
locomotive. "

So excited was he by his vision that he began construction without
waiting to arrange for financing. When the project neared completion
in August 1887, Edison was still scrambling to sign outside investors.
He hoped to raise $1 million, offering to form an industrial research
company in which he would hold half of the equity. No less grandiose
were his plans for factories that would be built in the valley to produce
his inventions. These, he predicted, would eventually employ fifteen
thousand people and return 500 percent to the pioneer shareholders.

Edison acknowledged that his relationship with Edison Electric's
board of directors had become less than amicable and he conceded in a

letter to a prospective backer that "my place is in the Laboratory." He
was confident that by outfitting the lab in advance with everything he
could possibly need, it would produce" 1 0 times as much" as a lab with
empty shelves, dependent upon ordering materials, castings, or machin
ery when a particular need came up. He wanted to be ready whenever
inspiration paid a visit. He expected to have thirty or forty projects
going simultaneously, all profitable yet none as "cumbersome" as the
electric light.

Edison had a knack for coming up with memorable images. News

paper reporters who came by especially liked the one about ladies
watches-to-locomotives. It was used for years even though neither
watch, nor locomotive, nor anything close to either would emerge. The



\ 155

only people who were not immediately charmed by Edison's vision were
the prospective investors. When his fund-raising efforts petered out,
Edison quietly dropped his plan to organize a separate company to
oversee the intellectual property that he expected to produce. He ended
up being the sole owner and merged his own personal bank accounts
with those of the lab. Contract work for other companies provided
much needed cash, but also kept Edison entangled in the agendas im
posed by others. Freedom to do exactly as he pleased in his laboratory
turned out to be elusive.

The shortage of cash affected Mina, who was given responsibility to
manage Glenmont while Edison gave his undivided attention to launch

ing his new laboratory. About this time she directed a salaried house
hold staff that included a waitress, cook, maid, and laundress, as well as
various gardeners and stable hands. Earlier, in 1887, when construction
on the laboratory was beginning, Mina's father, Lewis Miller, wrote to
his daughter and reviewed the financial difficulties Edison had found
himself in, having begun erecting the lab so soon after stretching his fi
nances to purchase the Pedder mansion. The shortage of capital had
made Edison "cautious" when it came to budgeting for household ex
penses, making newlywed Mina's life as chief household executive
rather "hard." Miller praised her for handling the challenges well, but
he also told her she should expect to be on her own in doing so, as he
thought that Edison "did not care much to hear about home affairs."

After spending about $180,000 on the new lab, Edison had every
thing he could imagine ever needing. He was not going to squander
splendid facilities merely to refine what was already in existence, how
ever. Only projects that had yet to be realized would do. By January
1888 he was still pursuing Henry Villard as a possible investor, offering
him the opportunity to own a half share in his new inventions for cover

ing the $60,000 he estimated the lab's operating expenses would run
annually. On the list of projects he planned to pursue was the mechani
cal cotton picker, the inspiration he had brought home from his honey
moon, and the hearing aid, the invention he had delayed working on



156 / 

ever since the news of the phonograph's appearance had brought mail
bags full of entreaties from strangers. Other interests included using
electricity to cut ice; sheet glass; "artificial ivory"; and railroad signals.

When Edison subsequently revised the estimated annual expenses for
the lab upward 50 percent to $90,000, Villard declined the invitation to
invest. This left Edison without outside financing-and without outside
guidance. By beginning-and then completing-construction of the lab
complex prior to arranging the commitment of investors, Edison made
sure that the project would go forward without compromises, exactly
as he had dreamed, whether others believed in him or not.

At precisely the time he was readying his lab, circumstances forced
him to return to the one older invention he had been least interested in

working on again: the phonograph. In the early 1880s, he had been em
barrassed by the mechanical problems of the tinfoil phonograph, its
modest sales, and the damage to his reputation. In 1884, Off-Hand
Portraits ofProminent New Yorkers said that "the failure of the phono
graph did much to destroy the popularity of Mr. Edison." But by 1887,
a new rival, the American Graphophone Company, whose wax-coated
cylinders could be removed without damage to the recording, which
was not possible when using tinfoil, was poised to make a success
where he had met with failure. Edison, who was as competitive as any
one, could not abide the prospect of being passed by others. The fact
that his old nemesis Alexander Graham Bell was a member of the three

person group that had invented the graphophone raised Edison's ire to
the point that he could think of nothing else but joining battle.

Edison's phonograph patents offered no protection, as they had been
filed tardily, after foreign patents had been obtained by others. After re
viewing the legal issues, Edison explained to Edward Johnson, "We
cant [sic] stop anybody." The Graphophone Company, for its part, ap
proached Edison with conciliatory offers that were unnecessary given
its strong legal position. The company flattered him as the" real" inven
tor of the talking phonograph (one of the earliest graphophone record
ings ended with this concise autobiography: "I am a graphophone and
my mother was a phonograph"). It offered to turn over the grapho-



\ 157

phone and its improvements to him, to pay the costs of any additional
experimental work that might be needed, and to grant him half interest
in the merged companies, gratis. Company officials tried to persuade
Edison's London representative, Colonel Gouraud, to consider a senior

position in their company and to approach Edison about accepting a
"complimentary" equity position, were Edison willing to approve use
of the Edison name on the product.

Edison would never agree to share the mantle of Papa of the Phono

graph with anyone else. He fired off a tart note to Gouraud: "Under no
circumstances will I have anything to do with Graham Bell [or] with his
phonograph pronounced backward." Edison claimed to have come up
with a wax-cylinder machine that was better than Bell's and pointed out
he was already building the factory that would enable him soon to
"flood" the market with them at "factory prices."

Gouraud congratulated Edison for coming up with a "practical" ma
chine and announced he would side with Edison and drop his proposed
affiliation with the American Graphophone interests. He was consider
ate of Edison's feelings and did not mention that it was only the goad of
competition that had motivated Edison to return to his work on the

phonograph. Alfred Tate, a senior manager who worked for Edison at
this time, would later confirm that it had been the Graphophone Com
pany's overtures to Edison that had "shocked him into action."

Edison spoke dismissively of Bell and his Graphophone associates,
whom he described as "pirates attempting [to] steal my invention."
After being rebuffed, the American Graphophone Company dropped
the polite ritual of paying tribute to the Wizard. A story made the
rounds about the time when Charles Sumner Tainter, Bell's colleague
and the principal inventor of the graphophone, was asked about future
collaboration with Edison. Tainter had replied, "Thomas A. Edison can
go to Hell! He hasn't got anything that he didn't steal from me."

Edison personally did not have the financial resources to build out his
manufacturing capacity and distribution system so that he could go head
to head against the Graphophone Company, which had a sizable lead
in the race to get machines to market. For a single, promising business



158 / 

opportunity like this, he could still get the attention of the wealthy
angel investors who had passed up his earlier invitation to fund Edison
so he could play in his new laboratory. A group of four agreed to come
to Orange to see a demonstration of Edison's "perfected" phonograph.

When his guests were gathered around him, Edison spoke into the
tube and recorded a speech he had prepared. He then stood back confi
dently to listen to the playback. The words could not be heard, how
ever, over a continuous hissing sound. Edison was visibly perplexed; the
machine had worked perfectly only fifteen minutes earlier. He changed
the wax cylinder, made another recording, and played it back. The hiss
ing returned. Alfred Tate described the scene.

Edison was bewildered. There was no possible way in which he
could account for such a result. Again and again he tried to get
that instrument to talk, and again and again it only hissed at
him. The time of our guests was limited. They had apportioned
one hour for the demonstration, ample time had the instrument
functioned. Mr. Dolan and Mr. Cochrane had to catch a train

for their homes in Philadelphia and their time for departure
came while Edison still was engaged in a futile effort to repro
duce his own voice. Most courteously these gentlemen promised
to return to the laboratory when Edison had discovered and
corrected the obscure defect in the instrument. They left. But
they never came back.

The malady was eventually traced back to the ill-timed decision by
one of Edison's assistants to swap, just before the guests arrived, a criti
cal part used for reproducing the sound. He thought he had installed a
superior part but it was just a bit wider than it should have been, pro
ducing disaster.

The flubbed demonstration turned out to have irreversible ramifica

tions. Edison would not have another opportunity to obtain funding to
support his own phonograph company. He was subsequently saved
from financial ruin by a member of the nouveau riche, Jesse Lippincott,



\ 159

who had made a fortune making glassware and had lately taken an in
terest in the thrills of building up the phonograph business. His North
American Phonograph Company, which took on the distribution of
Edison's phonograph, would prove to be woefully undercapitalized.
Edison, however, could not be picky; financially, he was out of options
and agreed to the arrangement through gritted teeth. (Lippincott's com
pany simultaneously distributed the Graphophone, too.)

Ezra Gilliland played an instrumental role in the negotiations between
Lippincott and Edison. Because Gilliland enjoyed an unusually close per
sonal relationship with Edison, he spoke with more candor than other
business associates. The Edison phonographs that were produced in trial
manufacturing runs were riddled with defects, and Gilliland did not hide
his displeasure. The machines that Gilliland had looked at "would not
compare favorably with the graphophone." He went on to warn Edison
about steering clear of shoddy business practices: "I have never felt that
you would put it upon the market in that condition."

Edison needed to hear straight talk about problems, but unfortu
nately Gilliland was soon out of the picture, his relationship with Edi
son ending abruptly on bad terms. The split came when Edison
discovered that Gilliland had negotiated a side deal with Lippincott at
the time that Gilliland was representing Edison's interests in the negoti
ations with Lippincott's North American Phonograph Company. In
consideration of Gilliland's transfer of his "agency" rights for the
phonograph that Edison had given him earlier, Gilliland and Edison's
attorney took two-thirds of the $125,000 cash that Lippincott paid for
the distribution rights to the phonograph. The two men arranged for
the payment to themselves without telling Edison.

Lippincott was unaware that Edison had not been consulted and

happened to mention the details of the deal to Edison only after it was
completed. When the press heard about the affair, it depicted Edison as
a dupe who had been "razzle-dazzled" out of $250,000 by Gilliland,
his trusted confederate. Edison was shocked by the revelation and re
sponded with a lawsuit, but was unsuccessful in pressing his claim that
the money paid for agency rights was properly due him. The episode



160/ 

made Edison even more withdrawn. With Gilliland, he had allowed
business matters and personal life to commingle, and it had come to this
regrettable end. (He would not let down his guard again until late in
life, and then, only with a friend whose much greater wealth removed
concern that Edison would be taken advantage of: Henry Ford.)

Having retained control over design and manufacturing, Edison was
responsible for delivering the finished product to Lippincott. The inven
tor, now settled in his completed lab, could not resist tweaking the final
design, and tweaking it some more. Even though Edison announced the
completion of his "Perfected Phonograph" in May 1888, he continued
to tinker, supervising 120 lab personnel who were pursuing sixty sepa
rate experiments related to the phonograph. The remainder of the year
passed, and he still was not satisfied and refused to release the first ma
chines for sale.

It was not until the spring of 1889 that Edison reluctantly began to
ship the Perfected Phonograph. Even then he grumbled privately he had
been so rushed that the battery design remained unsatisfactory. He did
not seem concerned, however, about what would happen when cus
tomers made the unpleasant discovery that the batteries in their new
phonograph were the same ones that Edison privately told Batchelor
were "not of much value." (The graphophone, which had gone on sale
eighteen months earlier, had a more reliable source of power-a foot
treadle-but it too had its own shortcomings.)

Upon its release, Edison's Perfected Phonograph was immediately
scooped up by the individuals who leaped to be among the first to possess
newly available technology. The governor of Wyoming purchased three
phonographs so he would have one on hand for dictating correspon
dence wherever he happened to be. A distributor in New York noticed
the beginnings of the extended workday for executives, as the phono
graph made dictation at home feasible. Recordings made in the evening
could be brought to the office in the next morning for transcription by a
"type-writer" (the person shared the same name with the machine).



\ 161

Unfortunately for the North American Phonograph Company, and
for Edison, the Perfected Phonograph was far from perfect, and not
really functional. The wax cylinders were fragile, the mechanical works
prone to breakdown. The phonograph required a resident expert to
keep it properly adjusted. The Atlantic Monthly said that "trusting its
manipulation to the office boy or the typewriter girl, that is out of the
question for the present." The intelligibility of the recorded voice was
unpredictable, "something of a lottery."

Edison, however, was exasperated by the complaints of customers,
whose own incompetence he blamed for failing to get satisfactory results.
After the first reports of defects came in, he dictated to Charles Batchelor
four single-spaced typewritten pages in response to a single field report,
ending his reply with "I could go on for a week answering this kind of a
letter." What was the point, he wondered aloud, when the complaining
customer was someone "who does not know how to work the machine"?

While Edison continued to use his own human amanuensis for dicta

tion, he installed a phonograph in the office of Alfred Tate. "I was the
'dog' on which this novel method was tried out," Tate wrote in his
memoirs. For Tate, using the phonograph to carry out his work was an
exercise in frustration. He noticed that acids in the wax coating on the

cylinders corroded the steel stylus, making playback unreliable. He also
did not like having to stand in one place, speaking into the tube, pre
venting him from pacing the office to "clarify and accelerate thought."
Whenever he shoved the phonograph aside and called in a stenographer
to take a letter, Edison would choose that moment to happen by, poke
his head in the door, and say disapprovingly, "Aha! Shoemakers' chil
dren never wear boots."

Eight thousand Edison machines with the defective steel styluses
were returned to the factory, arriving without protective packing mate
rial. They were in such poor shape that they could not be refurbished
and had to be junked. Quality problems afflicted the graphophone, too.
Lippincott's company tottered on the precipice.

All was not bleak, however. Everyone who tried out the phonograph
everyone but Edison, that is-was struck by its beautiful reproduction



162 / 

of music, which it handled far better than the sound of the human
voice. The same article in the Atlantic Monthly that had pointed out the
machine's shortcomings as a device for office stenography also heaped
praise on its ability to magnify musical sounds without distortion. Al
though there were very few recorded songs available for sale, the re
ports from the field showed avid interest among consumers. At the first

convention of phonograph dealers in 1890, one distributor reported
that one customer was "a crank on the subject," spending as much as
$100 a week for musical cylinders (about $2,000 in current dollars).

Tate and other Edison associates did their best to persuade Edison of
the commercial potential of a phonograph marketed for entertainment
purposes, but Edison was so attached to his original notion that the
phonograph was best suited to office dictation that he could not let go
of it. He also did not give the business issues as much attention as the
technical issues. As always, nothing gave him as much pleasure as
notching more patents to his name, and with his vastly larger lab space
and staff working at his behest, the temptation to accumulate patents
by the bushel was irresistible. In the course of three years, 1888-1890,
he was granted seventy-six related to the phonograph alone.

Tate speculated in his memoirs afterward that Edison was reluctant
to accept the phonograph as a machine for playing music because he
did not want his phonograph associated with wind-up music boxes.
Edison was dedicated to bringing out "useful" inventions, a mission
that would be sullied by its association with something as frivolous as
Victorian "toys" marketed to adults.

Children's toys, however, were a different matter. Even as the North
American Phonograph Company was spinning down the drain, Edison
also worked on a separate venture: a talking doll. He had licensed rights
to the concept when he had invented the phonograph a decade earlier
and nothing had come of the deal. Now he had the laboratory of his
dreams and all things seemed possible. In the spring of 1890, in the fac
tory he had built adjacent to the laboratory he employed hundreds of
girls for recording, again and again, the nursery rhymes for each doll.
He had not yet come up with a way of reproducing a recording from a



\ 163

master, so each cylinder had to be recorded individually. He and toy dis
tributors looked forward eagerly to Christmas season sales. Advance
orders far outstripped the factory's capacity.

These dolls, the first-generation ancestors of Chatty Cathy, did not
prove capable of being very chatty. Everyone was tested at Edison's fac
tory before being shipped, but in the course of the journey to stores, the
internal organs of almost every single doll suffered injuries that left it
capable of emitting nothing but discordant squeaks. One dealer found
that of the first 200 dolls sold, 188 were returned. At that point, he told

prospective customers that his remaining stock of dolls was for sale
only on an as-is basis, without guarantee. He then learned what the
modern parent knows all too well: The hot toy of a given season must be
obtained by any means necessary (and in any condition). His customers
continued to buy up the doll.

After the 1890 Christmas season had passed, and the tears of disap
pointed children dried, Edison shrugged off blame and distanced himself
from the party that was least responsible, the company to whom he had
licensed the marketing rights. With the loss of Edison's name, the com
pany died and the talking dolls' fiasco was complete. On a parallel
track, the North American Phonograph Company similarly failed to
survive while handling Edison's far-from-Perfected Phonograph. The
Phonograph Company's principal owner suffered, too. Lippincott fell
behind in his payments to Edison, suffered a paralyzing stroke, and died
soon after.

These ventures were the first ones that Edison mounted after building
his new laboratory complex. Their unhappy endings suggest that Edi
son was mistaken in thinking that expanded space, new equipment, and
large technical support staff were everything he would need to succeed
in his ambition to eclipse his own earlier achievements in Menlo Park.

Two years before, soon after the lab had begun operations, Edison
had declared publicly that his inventions should be judged only on the
basis of commercial success. This had come about when a reporter for

the New York World had asked him a battery of questions that threw
him off balance: "What is your object in life? What are you living for?



164 / 

What do you want?" Edison reacted as if he'd been punched in the
stomach, or so the writer described the effect with exaggerated drama.
First, Edison scanned the ceiling of the room for answers, then looked
out the window through the rain. Finally, he said he had never thought
of these questions "just that way." He paused again, then said he could
not give an exact answer other than this: "I guess all 1 want now is to
have a big laboratory" for making useful inventions. "There isn't a bit
of philanthropy in it," he explained. "Anything that won't sell 1 don't
want to invent, because anything that won't sell hasn't reached the
acme of success. Its sale is proof of its utility, and utility is success."

He had been put on the spot by the reporter, and had reflexively given
the marketplace the power to define the meaning of his own life.



CHAPTER EIGHT



By
THE EARLY twentieth century, Edison had earned a reputation

as "the world's greatest inventor and world's worst business

man." The phrasing, attributed to Henry Ford, is memorable,
even if both characterizations as greatest and worst are too extreme to be

accepted literally. The range of Edison's technical interests was enormous,
but it is hard to separate cleanly his accomplishments from those of his
assistants. His standing as a businessperson is not aptly described in ex
treme terms, either. He never passed through bankruptcy, nor lost owner
ship of Glenmont or his Orange laboratory. In fact, he was a genuine
millionaire at the time of his death in 1931. Still, Ford was correct, Edison
was the "world's worst" businessperson if one compares what Edison
himself earned from his most significant inventions to the far larger sums
earned by his contemporaries who profited from Edison's original work.
The dismal commercial beginnings of Edison's phonograph business pro
vide materials for one case study; the shaky start of electric light service
provides materials for another.

The central irony in Edison's biography is that his electric light be
came the foundation of a viable business, eventually known as General
Electric, only after Edison yielded control of its management. Samuel
InsulI, Edison's young assistant, deserves credit for his role in guiding
the electric light business through the transition from Edison era to
post-Edison. Insull was precociously self-assured. He spoke well, dressed
well, and made sure that everything was handled just so. Edison gave

165



166 / 

him genuine decision-making authority because Insull was preternatu
rally adept at management and yet, because of his youth and lack of
technical background, he could never be Edison's peer, drawing public
attention away from Edison. Technically gifted individuals who arrived
at the Lab with their own strong opinions, such as Nikola Tesla and
Frank Sprague, clashed constantly with Edison and left. Insull had
strong opinions, too, but he stuck around longer than the engineers. He
had begun as Edison's private secretary-the cocky lad, then only
twenty-one years old, had insisted that he be appointed to the position
as a condition of his emigration from England-and was soon taking
care of whatever Edison needed, from buying clothes to arranging for
financing for Edison's businesses. Edison no longer needed to sign his
own checks; Insull wrote them. As for handling correspondence, Edison
merely scribbled a yes or a no in the margin of a letter that had arrived,
and Insull would figure out how to compose a detailed response to the
correspondent. (Insull's talent for creative writing makes it likely that he
was a collaborator in, if not the author of, Edison's formal letter to
Lewis Miller, seeking his blessing for Edison's marriage to Mina.)

What is most surprising about Insull's relationship with Edison was
that it was not at all sycophantic. He was the only member of Edison's
inner circle who was unafraid to tease Edison publicly about sensitive
subjects, such as Edison's heavy reliance on staff members in the inven
tion factory. One evening, Edison, InsulI, and others were sitting
around in the office, bantering, when Edison teased Insull about his
comically extreme self-confidence in his expertise in business. Insull re
taliated, telling everyone present how Edison really worked: In the
evening, Edison would hand out various assignments to his lab assis
tants, who were expected to toil through the night. He would then lie
down and sleep. In the morning, he would arise, have a good breakfast,
and exclaim, "What a wonderful night's work I have done." This was
daring-everyone present knew well that it was not far from the truth.
At first, Edison showed irritation, but then regained his equanimity and
laughed with the others.

There was precious little else to laugh about, after all. After Pearl



 \ 167

Street's launch, Edison's various electric light businesses struggled to re
main alive. The Edison Electric Light Company failed to win contracts
with large- or even medium-sized cities, so Edison decided to add an
other company to his portfolio, the Thomas A. Edison Central Station
Construction Department, which offered to build turnkey power-and
light systems. The business it attracted turned out to be meager. Instead
of relieving Edison's financial difficulties, the Construction Department
only exacerbated them.

The financial reports that came in from the municipal licensees show
a painfully slow process of winning customers. The Edison Electric Illu
minating Company of Jackson, Mississippi, which could boast of
$100,000 in capital stock, reported profits of $139 for the first four
months of 1886. For the first nine months of that year, the electric com

pany in Cumberland, Maryland, reported profits of $282. Des Moines
earned $426 for the first eight months, and New Bedford, Massachu
setts, $155.

One wag wrote a mock letter to the shareholders of the Edison

United Manufacturing Company: "We wish to impress the fact indeli
bly on the minds of our stockholders that our object is not to make
money. This fact once accepted will prevent much dissatisfaction and
many unpleasant explanations."

Samuel Insull was Edison's right-hand man-and left-hand man
when Edison's finances were in their most parlous state. One night, the
two hunched over the books, mulling over schemes to put off the credi
tors of Edison's Construction Department. In matters of finance, Edison
deferred to Insull, but Insull himself later said that he himself "knew
little or nothing" about the subject. Edison's assets were tied up in the
various companies that supplied Edison Electric. He had no cash and
was embarrassed that he could barely meet his household expenses.
Only royalties from some hitherto-forgotten telegraphic devices saved
him from worse. Insull was personally getting by with loans from Edi
son associate Sigmund Bergmann and credit extended by Delmonico's,
where Insull ate two meals a day. The situation seemed so hopeless that
Edison, the irrepressible optimist, was wondering aloud that night what



168 / 

would happen to them. "This looks pretty bad," Edison confessed to
Insull. "I do not know just how we are going to live. I think I could go
back and earn my living as a telegraph operator."

It was the only time Insull ever saw Edison betray deep discourage
ment. The moment passed. Revenues in the other companies began to
increase, the Construction Department was liquidated, and prospects
for Edison's electrical interests began to look up. Insull played a major
role in the turnaround. Edison can be credited with being willing to
turn over major operational responsibilities to Insull, which he did only
because, by chance, a labor dispute created the opportunity.

In Edison's view, his troubles with his workers at the Edison Machine
Works on Goerck Street began when he was too generous.

It seems I had rather a socialistic strain in me, and I raised the

pay of the workmen twenty-five cents an hour above the prevail
ing rate of wages, whereupon Hoe & Company, our near neigh
bors, complained at our doing this. I said I thought it was all
right. But the men, having got a little more wages, thought they
would try coercion and get a little more, as we were considered

soft marks. Whereupon they struck at a time that was critical.

In his recollection in an oral history he prepared years later, Edison re
garded the incident as amusing. The strikers did not realize that Edi
son's company happened to be so short of cash that it would have
difficulty meeting its next payroll. Edison decided to use the strike as an
occasion to catch up on other matters, and when a committee represent

ing the strikers appeared at the company's offices to begin negotiations,
the office was empty. For two weeks, Edison and his managers found
other places to be. When they finally returned, they were pleased to dis
cover that "the workers were somewhat more anxious than we were."

There were no more demands for raises.

The strike by the Machine Works personnel had ended with a victory
for management, but the experience gave Edison an excuse to find a
new location far away. More spacious quarters were needed in any case.



 \ 169

The Machine Works was so cramped that lathes had to be placed on the
sidewalk, powered by belts that came through the shop windows. At
the time of the strike, the company had already purchased a piece of
property in Brooklyn and was about to let contracts for construction of
a new factory. But in the strike's aftermath, Edison decided to quit the
city and leave its workers behind. Charles Batchelor heard of a possible
site in upstate New York, in Schenectady. A locomotive works with two
large buildings situated on a ten-acre site, adjacent to rail tracks and the
Erie Canal, was available for less than the property alone in Brooklyn.
"And we will have no more trouble there from strikes," said Batchelor
to reporters, speaking exaggeratedly of strikes in the plural. Edison ap
pointed as general manager of his relocated machine works none other
than Samuel Insull, who had just turned twenty-seven years old.

The new position in Schenectady meant greater responsibility and di
minished income; Insull could no longer supplement his modest salary
by serving as a secretary to the boards of other Edison companies. It
rankled him that he was not given an allowance for entertaining and
had to personally maintain a stable of horses for the sporting pleasure
of guests of the company. He had never asked Edison for a raise, however,
and he decided to "leave these things to [Edison's] own good judgment
to deal with them whenever he thought it advisable."

Insull began with two hundred employees in Schenectady and immedi
ately obtained improved results, building up an electrical supply business
that was not dependent upon the sale of turnkey systems. He oversaw
newly brisk business in almost all lines: electrical conduits, dynamos, mo
tors, pulleys, and wire insulation. Discarding slack operations and sloppy
accounting, he reorganized the office so that statements to customers
went out on time, invoices were paid promptly, and letters handled pro
fessionally. By the fifth of each new month, he knew exactly how all the
accounts stood. He even introduced the novel concept of sales goals. By
"pushing" the department responsible for wire insulation, for example,
monthly sales increased within a year more than tenfold. Within sight
were annual profits of $100,000 a year for the combined departments.

After his first year was complete, Insull came down from Schenectady



170 / 

and paid a visit to Glenmont to report to Edison in person. Pleased with
what he heard, Edison rummaged in his waistcoat pocket and pulled
out a piece of paper that he handed to Insull. It represented stock war
rants in the company, which would be worth $75,000 when Insull cashed
them in. Edison also wanted to know who had paid for company
related entertainment. When Insull said he had absorbed the cost him

self, Edison awarded him on the spot a substantial raise in salary and a
separate entertainment allowance. Insull's decision to trust that Edison

would eventually reimburse him was vindicated.
Insull was engaged in an ongoing campaign to modernize business

practices in Edison's offices, a campaign that brought him into conflict,
at times, with other senior managers and with Edison himself. For

example, he berated Alfred Tate, who was in Orange, in a letter with an
unmistakably sharp tone. Insull wrote that in the future whenever he
asked Tate about a particular matter "what I want you to do in these
days of cheap telegraphic rates is to leave nothing to my imagination"
when replying. When he noticed that Tate had made a withdrawal de
pleting Edison's account the day before Edison had a note of $1,600
due, Insull was furious. "Don't you realize that the first thing in busi
ness should be to meet a man's notes and let everything else wait?"

Poor Tate-he was merely acting at Edison's behest. Edison treated
the Schenectady shops as a handy source of funding for his lab com
plex. The more the shops prospered, the more boldly Edison, through
Tate, siphoned off the profits by overcharging the Schenectady factory
for lab services. In his second year in Schenectady, Insull noticed that
when the lab transferred materials up to the shop, the lab billed at
double the rate that the shop collected when the same materials moved
down to the lab. In January 1888, Insull openly defied Tate and Edison,
refusing to pay any more of Edison's laboratory bills until he could tote
up the outstanding liabilities. Insull wrote Tate: "The large and rapid
calls that [Edison] has made upon us for money simply puts me in the
position of being compelled to refuse to assume any further liability." In
July, furious at new charges assessed by the lab that Insull felt were
"simply outrageous," he threatened to bring the paperwork down to



 \ 171

Glenmont and "see Mr. Edison personally about them." This was blus
ter: Tate had done nothing without Edison's approval.

Under Insull's management, the Schenectady workforce grew from
two hundred to eight thousand in just six years. Looking back, Insull at
tributed his success during this time to simple geography: "We never
made a dollar until we got the factory 180 miles away from Mr. Edison."

Insull did not oversee the marketing of the Edison power and light
system, however. That remained under Edison's direct purview. Edi
son's conviction that his direct-current system was vastly superior to the
alternating-current systems of his competitors was unshakable. But it
would have been better for the business if he had been willing to pay
attention to what the market was telling him. Customers favored the
system that served a wide area. To avoid prohibitively high costs, Edi
son's direct-current generating station could only serve a small district,
like Pearl Street's. Edison sales agents in the field felt helpless as they lost
municipal contracts again and again in competitive bids against rivals
like Westinghouse, which offered an alternating current system, and
Thomson - Houston, which offered customers a choice of alternating or
direct current systems. A frustrated sales agent wrote the home office:

"Are we going to sit still and be called 'old fashioned,' 'fossils,' etc. and
let the other fellows get a lot of the very best paying business?" Edison's

longtime lieutenant Edward Johnson corroborated the reports from the
field, telling Edison that until the company had a system that could com
pete on price with alternating-current, "we may as well accept the fact"
that the company would not win business in its targets. Edison paid no
attention. He was convinced that his system was technically superior,
end of discussion. "If our patents were public property," he wrote an
acquaintance, "you wouldn't find an alternating man in the US."

Our view of a battle over two competing technical standards is
colored by our knowledge of the outcome. In retrospect, alternating
current appears fated to best direct current, just as VHS video recording
would best Betamax, and Edison appears naive in his faith that his
direct-current system would eventually triumph. In this case, however,
he was not as naive as it may appear. He believed his technology would



172 / 

triumph for a perfectly good reason: Edison's technology did not kill
utility workers; the competition's did.

"Killed By an Electric Shock" was a headline that ran frequently in
any city newspaper. A sample story from October 1887: A superinten
dent for Brush Electric in Detroit clambered up a pole to find out what
was wrong with a streetlight and set to work too hurriedly, neglecting
to put on the rubber gloves that were in his pockets. A police officer
who happened to be walking up the block saw the man fall uncon
scious, draped across the wires. Firemen were called, he was brought
down, and carried into the drugstore. No bruise or mark left visible evi
dence of his electrocution. Eulogized as a "careful man" who had been
a longtime employee, the victim also happened to be engaged to be mar
ried. The news story provided one more horrible detail: "When his
body was carried into the drug store last night his fiance by some
strange chance was at the counter making some purchases. Her grief
was most heartrending and moved some of the spectators to tears."

These stories invariably commented upon the paradox: The electrical
current was lethal, yet did not leave visible marks that were proportion
ate to its power. When a manager of an electric light company in Lyons,
New York, stopped for a moment on his way home to tinker with a
malfunctioning arc light on the street, he was fatally felled, but the only
mark was a small hole in his thumb where it had come in contact with

the alternating current. In another incident, reported under the headline
"Struck Dead in a Second," a superintendent of the United States Illu
minating Company in New York was called upon to snip wires that
were interfering with firefighters who were trying to extinguish a fire in
the commercial district. He received a fatal shock. When rushed into a

nearby store, the crowd of curious onlookers who followed were mysti
fied by the invisible nature of the force that had killed him. "His fea
tures were not in the least distorted, and death might have resulted from
heart disease. "

Passersby occasionally were victims, too. In April 1888, a seventeen
year-old boy walking down Broadway was killed when he brushed
against a telegraph wire that dangled overhead, crossing two wires



\ 173

from the United States Illuminating Company. The New York World
worried that "right on Broadway, where thousands and thousands of
people are passing during all hours of the day, scores of wires are swing
ing in mid-air, anyone of which is likely to become dislodged." An alert
person could avoid being run over by a careless driver, but "no amount
of agility will be of any avail to him when a deadly arc-light current is
conveyed without a note of warning into his anatomy."

The lethal potential of electricity caught the notice of New York state
legislators in Albany who were interested in utilizing electricity for cap
ital punishment. A commission was appointed to look into the matter.
It surveyed judges, district attorneys, sheriffs, and doctors, and found
slightly more respondents favored electrocution than hanging (though
five held out for the guillotine and four for the garrote). One physician
pointed out that little was actually known about the effects of strong
currents on the body, and "if lightning [does] not always kill, surely we
cannot expect death to result from artificial electricity." Nevertheless,
the commission decided to recommend using "current of electricity" as
the means of execution, replacing hanging.

When Edison first introduced electric light service in New York City,
his primary competition at the time had been the gas utilities, so he had
done his best to call public attention to the dangers of gas. But when
Westinghouse and other well-capitalized competitors entered the power
and-light business, Edison began instead to talk of the dangers of alter
nating current. The state's consideration of adopting electrocution for
executions gave him an opportunity to point to the inherently dangerous
nature of the competition's technology. Edison personally favored abol
ishing capital punishment, but as long it remained in place, he advocated
using the technology that was most lethal and thus would inflict the least
amount of suffering: alternating current. He told the New York advisory
commission that the best machine for this purpose was the standard dy
namo manufactured by "Mr. Geo. Westinghouse, Pittsburgh."

Edison was also more than happy to give thought to devising a new
word for this new form of capital punishment. One associate suggested a
new verb for execution by electricity, "to westinghouse," and also a new



174 / 

noun, as in "such and such a man was condemned to the westinghouse."
Dr. Guillotin had been so honored; why not give Mr. Westinghouse "the
benefit of the fact in the minds of the public"? To his credit, Edison was
not so crass and instead favored "ampermort," "dynamort," or "elec
tromort.

" The New York Times did not spell out which word it favored,
but expressed emphatically its opposition "to 'electrocution,' which pre
tentious ignoramuses seem to be trying to push into use."

By the time George Westinghouse had entered the electric light busi
ness in 1886, he had already made his first fortune from his invention of
the air brake for railroads, and he was no slouch himself in piling up
hundreds of patents as an inventor. In Edison's view, however, Westing
house did not pose a serious threat in the power-and-light business be
cause he used the relatively more dangerous alternating current, certain
to kill one of his own customers within six months.

Edison's conviction that direct current was less dangerous than alter
nating current was based on hunch, however, not empirical scientific re
search. He, like others at the time, focused solely on voltage (the force
that pushes electricity through a wire) without paying attention to
amperage (the rate of flow of electricity), and thought it would be best
to stay at 1,200 volts or less. Even he was not certain that his own sys
tem was completely safe-after all, he had elected to place wires in un
derground conduits, which was more expensive than stringing wires
overhead but reduced the likelihood of electrical current touching a
passerby. Burying the wires could not give him complete peace of mind,
however. Privately, he told Edward Johnson that "we must look out for
crosses [i.e., short-circuited wires] for if we ever kill a customer it would
be a bad blow to the business."

The Edison system was spared the scandal of causing accidental
deaths, which gave Edison all the more reason to feel confident that
customers would very soon see the differences in systems. He coined an

infelicitous slogan to describe his own: "High Economy, No Risk."
Surely customers would reject Westinghouse's and embrace his. But it
did not happen. The accidents involving alternating current were not



 \ 175

frequent enough, nor was responsibility for the deaths publicly pinned
on Westinghouse or any single company.

Westinghouse's alternating current was superior to Edison's direct
current if considered from a strictly business perspective. Alternating
current could be distributed much more economically, and to greater
distances from a generating plant, than could direct current. This gave
Westinghouse's company the ability to undercut Edison's prices; by
1887, it was expanding quickly all over the map, as if no competition
stood in its way.

Cooperation between rivals was another possibility, one that oc
curred to George Westinghouse. Antitrust restrictions did not exist
this was two years before the Sherman Anti-Trust Act was enacted and

many more years would pass before the federal government began to
enforce it. In June 1888, Westinghouse took the initiative and wrote
Edison a warm letter, exploring the possibility of rapprochement. He
said that it must have been others who had sought to drive a wedge be
tween Westinghouse Electric and Edison Electric. He, for his part, was
most appreciative of the hospitality that Edison had shown him when
Westinghouse had paid a visit to Menlo Park, shopping for a power
plant for his own house before he had entered the business himself and
even before Edison Electric had formally launched its own service. It
would be a pleasure, Westinghouse wrote, if Edison would visit him in
Pittsburgh where "I will be glad to reciprocate the attention shown me
by you." Edison turned down Westinghouse's overture, however, claim
ing that his work in the laboratory forced him to turn over all business
matters to others. He would later say to a colleague that Westinghouse's
"methods of doing business lately are such that the man has gone crazy
over sudden accession of wealth or something unknown to me and is
flying a kite that will land him in the mud sooner or later."

Westinghouse's invitation had arrived just as Edison was directing lab
experiments whose purpose was to undermine Westinghouse's reputa
tion, namely, how much electrical current was needed to execute a human
being? Stray dogs were used as surrogates at the lab, which offered to



176 / 

boys in Orange a bounty of twenty-five cents for each hapless dog deliv
ered to its gates for the advancement of science (and intercompany com

petition). Edison told the Brooklyn Citizen how the effect of direct
current left the dog subjects unchanged in appearance, and then, after a
minute, they would tumble over dead. Alternating current, however,
killed in as little as one-tenth of a second. This impressed the lab assis
tants, who took care to wear rubber gloves even when writing in the
lab's notebook, Edison said "with a grin."

Edison's bounty offer was so successful that soon no more canine
volunteers could be had. The very day after he had curtly turned Wes
tinghouse away, Edison wrote to the Society for the Prevention of Cru
elty to Animals to augment his local supply. Anticipating that mention
of capital punishment was unlikely to elicit the desired cooperation of
the SPCA, Edison blandly explained that he was looking into determin
ing the exact quantity of electricity required to kill dogs, work that
would incidentally help to safeguard the lives of linemen in the electric
power business. Would the SPCA be so kind as to supply some "good
sized" animals as soon as possible?

Henry Bergh, the society's president, could not understand how Mr.
Edison, whom he regarded as a "genius" who had "conferred such
great and lasting benefits upon humanity," could have so misunder
stood the mission of the SPCA. The dogs placed in Edison's care would
be subjects in experiments that entailed suffering, not instantaneous
death. And the great scientist had to be told that any data that he col

lected at his lab would have no value for his avowed purpose, saving the
lives of linemen, given the disparity in electrical force required to kill
humans compared with small animals.

Such was his celebrity and presumed expertise that no one pointed
out that it was strange that Edison was experimenting with small mam
mals months after he had spoken with such certainty about the effects
of electrical currents upon humans. It had been his letter-the one rec

ommending generators made by "Mr. Geo. Westinghouse, Pittsburgh"
to "inflict the least amount of suffering upon its victim" -that had per
suaded one member of the New York commission to shift his support



 \ 177

from morphine executions to electrocution, making the panel's recom
mendation a unanimous one. Its report, in turn, led directly to passage
of a new capital punishment law in New York State, changing the
method of executing criminals from hanging to electrocution.

Perhaps the state had acted a bit too hastily. The first person to be sen
tenced under the new law was one William Kemmler, a Buffalo resident
convicted of murdering his female companion with an ax. He lacked suf
ficient education to do more than mark an X on his confession, but the
world took notice of the case when he was sentenced to death by electro
cution, making him a human guinea pig. His plight drew attention and a
new attorney who volunteered to press his appeal, arguing, "We hold
that the state cannot experiment upon Kemmler."

The judge who heard the appeal understandably blanched at uphold
ing the constitutionality of the new law without assurance from the sci
entific community about the humaneness of electrocution. Hearings were
ordered up, and the leading experts were deposed. The star witness was
the world-renowned authority on all matters electrical. "How long
have you been engaged in the work of an inventor or electrician?" Edison
was asked. "Twenty-six years." What would happen if current-not that
from Edison's system, but the competition's-were applied to Kemmler
for five or six minutes? Would he be carbonized? Edison was asked.

"No," he replied, "he would be mummyized. All the water in his body
would evaporate in five or six minutes." The tone of peerless authority,
which was Edison's public style, remained intact even when he was
cross-examined. The Wizard, who was chewing an unlit cigar, received
a light and was dismissed; Kemmler's initial appeal was not successful.
New motions were filed, but the appointed day of execution neared.

Edison's campaign to link in the public's mind alternating current
with fatal consequences, whether accidental or intentional, was gaining
momentum. George Westinghouse stepped forward to counterattack,
his words thrown against those of Edison's and the other proponents of
electrocution.

Westinghouse wielded a variety of arguments in defense of alternat
ing current. Its low cost brought incandescent lighting within the reach



178 / 

of the multitude, and its low voltage within the house-lower than Edi
son's-made it safer, he claimed. The package also included his own
pseudoscientific theory, with no more substance than Edison's, that an
alternating current was inherently less harmful because its momentary
reversal of direction "prevents decomposition of tissues." No discus
sion was complete without argument by anecdote, and Westinghouse
was not remiss. A lineman had accidentally grabbed hold of a live wire
with one thousand volts of alternating current and held on for three
minutes. Yes, the man was shocked insensible, but not only had he
lived, he "in fact was able to go on with his work after a short period."

This was a reassuring tale, uncomplicated with details that would
permit it to be independently verified. Westinghouse could not provide
such a comforting coda to another accident involving a lineman, how
ever. On 11 October 1889, John E. H. Feeks, thirty-two, was engaged
in cutting down dead telegraph and alarm wires on a pole in downtown
Manhattan for Western Union when the accident occurred. The time

and location made it visible to many people: just after one o'clock in the
afternoon, near Chambers and Centre Streets, in the shadow of the city
offices, with hundreds of people hurrying below on the sidewalk.
Astride a crossbar, Feeks was reaching out for a wire that he intended to
cut when he appeared to shiver and tremble. Putting out his right hand,
he seized another wire as though to steady himself-and sparks and
blue flames shot out of his hand. He fell forward, and was held aloft by
the dense bands of wires that ran across lower crossbars, suspended
some forty feet above the ground. With flames seen coming from his
mouth and nose and feet, and blood dropping and pooling on the side
walk below, this tableau could not have been more ghastly. The crowd
swelled, and police had difficulty clearing space for the rescuers. It took
thirty long minutes before the body could be brought down.

Court officials and members of the Board of Aldermen were among
the witnesses, and the very public nature of Feeks's death brought im
passioned calls for swift action to bring the company responsible to ac
count. Responsibility could not be easily assigned, however. The pole
upon which he was working did not have any wires that belonged to an



 \ 179

electric light company. The United States Illuminating Company ran
wires elsewhere on the street, but though it was reasonable to assume
that one of its wires was improperly insulated, the fatal current could
not be traced with certainty to a particular point of contact. Without
question, moving all power lines to underground conduits, as in Edi
son's system, would eliminate the danger in running them overhead
amid tangles with others. Demands for requiring electric light compa
nies to move their lines underground became conspicuously louder fol
lowing Feeks's death.

Edison did not add his support to these proposals, which he faulted for
not going far enough in addressing the danger posed by alternating cur
rent's relatively higher voltage. He told a reporter that insulation on wires
buried in the ground provided no measure of safety-the current would
burn through the insulating fibers, and then "the dangerous current will
creep into your house, and will come up the manholes." In October 1889,
he urged the readers of the New York Evening Sun to press the mayor and
the Board of Health to enact regulations that would curtail "deadly cur
rents" within the city's boundaries. He reasoned, "Is there not a law in
New York against the manufacture of nitro-glycerine?"

The only purveyors of "deadly currents," of course, were Edison's
competitors. The battle of the currents was so important to Edison that
he made publicly disparaging comments about his rivals as persons, not
just as vendors of inferior technology. This, in turn, left his competitors
wondering why he had cast off the restraint expected in civilized com
petition. When George Westinghouse read in the newspaper that Edison
had called him a "shyster," Westinghouse's feelings were "very much
hurt," or so he said when he bumped into Edison's attorney.

Westinghouse faced a genuine crisis. Feeks's death, the calls for burying
power lines, and Edison's personal attacks added up to a public relations
mess for his company. Rather than remaining quiet and hoping that this
bad weather would blow over, Westinghouse decided to speak to the press
and try to put a better face on his business than Edison had drawn. He

could not avoid talking about Feeks, so he argued that direct current,
which was used on telegraph wires, was fully capable of inflicting the



180/ 

horrible burns suffered by the unfortunate lineman. The danger came
not from the particular form of current but from inadequate insulation.
If properly shielded, overhead wires were perfectly safe, he said. The
public had been stirred up by "the active work of the managers of the
Edison Company and of Mr. Edison, who have sought to turn the pres
ent situation to their advantage."

The defensive position that Westinghouse found himself in is illus
trated by the way he contradicted himself as he tried to defend overhead
wires. The wires that were supposedly safe were also the same wires that
he had to admit, yes, posed dangers, yes, but dangers of various kinds
had to be accepted throughout the modern city. Westinghouse said, "If
all things involving the use of power were to be prohibited because of the
danger to life, then the cable cars, which have already killed and maimed
a number of people, would have to be abolished." Say good-bye to
trains, too, he added, because of accidents at road crossings.

Westinghouse was not able to form these few off-the-cuff remarks
into a fully developed response. Edison, however, seized an opportunity
to further strengthen his position with a long article titled "Dangers of
Electric Lighting" that was published under his name by the North
American Review, which had invited the piece. It repeated the same ar
guments that he had been making and is notable as the zenith of Edi
son's influence in the battle of the currents. At that point, he was fully
justified in believing that he had the ear of the world and could make
everyone understand the superiority of his system of power and light.

His apparent mastery of the debate was short lived, however. The
next month, the North American Review gave Westinghouse an oppor
tunity to respond. Having gained some experience in public combat,
and with some time to do a little research, he brought new material and
fresh counterarguments to the debate. Statistics bolstered his case. In

1888, sixty-four people were killed in streetcar accidents in New York,
and twenty-three in gas-related accidents-and only five by accidental
electrocution. He pointed out that within an individual's own home,
"there is not on record a solitary instance of a person having been in
jured or shocked from the consumers' current of an alternating sys-



 \ 181

tern." Don't underestimate the power of direct current, he warned read

ers; he had personally "witnessed the roasting of a large piece of fresh
beef by a direct continuous current of less than one hundred volts
within two minutes." He invited readers to connect a tin pan to the

electrical wires of a home supplied by Edison's company and reproduce
the experiment for themselves.

Westinghouse also dredged up an old interview with Edison and
found this quotation: "I don't care so much for a fortune as I do for get
ting ahead of the other fellows." Westinghouse suggested to readers
that it was this, not the supposed merits of Edison's own system, that
drove Edison to exaggerate the dangers inherent in the systems of oth
ers and to minimize them in his own.

The most damning argument against Edison's system was what the
marketplace said about the relative merits and shortcomings of the two
rival systems. Those customers who had a choice were voting in favor
of alternating current, the less-expensive option. In only three years of
operation, Westinghouse's company had five times as many customers
as Edison's older company, testimony to the public's view that Westing
house offered lighting that he described as "safe, cheap, efficient."

American consumers ignored the question of whether alternating
current was truly "safe." As historian Mark Essig points out, the public
simply became blas about the accidents that continued to occur. Even
in the 1920s, when electricity finally became widely available in homes,
"about 1,000 Americans died annually from electric shock." Notwith
standing, the appeal of "cheap" electricity was powerful, and alternat
ing current was considerably cheaper because Edison's direct current
required progressively more expensive investments in copper wiring the
farther the system extended out from the generating plant. In 1889, cus
tomers were voting every day, and the results showed a landslide victory
for Edison's new competition.

It is probably not mere coincidence that 1880 was also the year that
Edison began to withdraw his own financial stake in the industry he
had founded. Starved for cash, he was receptive to an offer to gain
liquidity, selling his stake in the electric light to a syndicate of investors



182 / 

led by Henry Villard and financed largely by German concerns. What
the public saw was a newly formed company, the Edison General Elec
tric Company, which consolidated into a single organization the Edison
Electric Light Company and Edison's various manufacturing companies
that supplied the industry.

For his stake, Edison was given shares valued at $3.5 million. In his
official biography written decades later, Edison depicted the episode as
coming about from being too successful; orders had simply swamped
his undercapitalized company. Insull had suggested that they might run
into difficulties because of lack of capital, so when the offer to be
bought out came, "we concluded it was better to be sure than be sorry,
so we sold out for a large sum." When Insull had his own turn to talk
about the same events in his own memoirs, he termed the value of the
shares granted to Edison as "a small amount compared to the great
value to the world at large of the work done by Mr. Edison" in the field.

The shares in the new company gave Edison an opportunity to cash
out, and he did so, liquidating 90 percent of his stake. Why did he di
vest almost all of his holdings, rather than simply sell slowly, diversify
ing at a steady rate that would, at the same time, reassure investors that
he had not lost faith in the company? He wrote Villard afterward that
he had cashed out because he had been "under a desperate strain for
money for 22 years." Even as he continued to bark in public as loudly
as ever at alternating current, he was poised to enter "fresh and more
congenial fields of work," he told Villard. Iron-ore mining was going to
be his new passion. Insull wrote a colleague that Edison was "practi
cally intoxicated by the business."

Villard had tried to persuade Edison to agree to merge his electrical
companies with alternating-current rival Thomson-Houston. The two
companies' patent holdings were complementary and consolidation in
the industry seemed inevitable. But Edison could not accept it, for rea
sons that were not obvious. It was not the thought of joining hands
with the very interests he was campaigning against that was too much
to bear. Nor was he passionately committed to his own company, even
though this served as a convenient pretext to object to a merger with a



 \ 183

better-managed, better-capitalized company. Were Villard to proceed,
Edison told him "my usefulness as an inventor [would be] gone," argu
ing that it was the spur of competition that provided the fuel he needed
to persevere.

In fact, Edison was not interested in sticking around, merger or no.
His direct current was going to lose the battle of the currents, and he
could not accept graciously a prize for first runner-up. He had cashed
out his own personal position and was ready to move on to new proj
ects, but he wanted to leave on his own terms, not someone else's. He

also wanted to make certain that his Orange laboratory would continue
to receive financial support. Consolidating his various companies into
one, while spurning the Thomson-Houston offer, allowed him to do
what he wished.

The new Edison General Electric Company appointed Villard as
president, and Insull as vice president and, effectively, the chief opera
tians officer. Edison had assumed that his laboratory would be sup
ported as it had been previously, receiving $250,000 annually from his
various companies. But after Edison General Electric was organized,
the multiple sources of funds were reduced to a single company, and
that one was willing to pay only $85,000. Edison told Villard that the
shortfall "has produced absolute discouragement."

By withdrawing his own financial stake in the industry, Edison dis
covered too late that he had lost considerable power in directing his
own affairs at the lab, too. As a contract researcher, he had to do the
bidding of others. When the Association of Edison Illuminating Com
panies, which were the Edison system's licensees, convened in the sum
mer of 1889, the members spoke in the hoarse voice of the desperate:
They begged Edison General Electric to supply association members
with an alternating current system as soon as possible, within six
months at the latest. Insull was fully supportive and assigned the task of
developing the system to the person who was under contract to perform
research and new product development: Thomas Edison, the world's
most vociferous opponent of alternating current.

One year after agreeing to deliver the new system within six months,



184 / 

Edison had failed to do so. InsulI, not bothering to hide his anger, wrote
Edison with the tone used when addressing a subordinate whose recent
performance was wanting: "I would like to know definitely from you
what I can promise to our District Managers throughout the country."
He was not going to accept hollow assurances that would not be ful
filled. "I think that it is particularly important that in our new organiza
tion any promises I make to our people should be absolutely adhered
to, and I shall be glad if you will bear this in mind when you reply to
this letter." Edison did not like being spoken to in this manner. He had
his secretary write a short note saying that he had perused it but was
"unable to reply fully to it at the moment."

Edison was working on the project, albeit slowly. He may have
dragged his feet hoping that the first state-sponsored experiment in elec
trocution would publicize the menacing aspect of alternating current,
making it possible to imagine that its triumph was not certain after all.
The convicted murderer William Kemmler exhausted his appeals, and
the date of his execution was set for 6 August 1890. Here, at last, was
the moment Edison had anticipated: the lethal nature of alternating cur
rent would be demonstrated in dramatic fashion. Only the warden of
the state prison in Auburn and the individuals he had invited as official
witnesses would actually see the execution, but reporters and crowds
showed up anyhow. To accommodate the press, Western Union set up a
temporary dispatch office at the freight station. Curiosity seekers gath
ered around the prison walls, and atop trees, rooftops, and telegraph
poles, hoping to catch a glimpse of the condemned man.

"They say I am afraid to die," Kemmler said to one of his jailers after
breakfast that morning, "but they will find that I ain't." Indeed, when
he was led to the room with the chair constructed to bring his life to an
abbreviated end, he remained calm. As the warden adjusted the head
piece and the eleven straps that crossed his body and limbs, Kemmler
tested each one and advised the jailer when a strap needed adjustment.
"Warden, just make that a little tighter," he asked at one point. "We
want everything all right, you know."

When the electrodes had been attached and preparations were com-



Edison in 1880, at the age of 33.

Mary Stilwell
Edison, Edison's
first wife, in
1871, the year of
their wedding.



 



The first-generation tinfoil
phonograph in 1877.

Opposite: Edison in Mathew Brady's
Washington, D.C., studio in April 1878,
posed with a second-generation tinfoil
phonograph.

Edison in 1888, at the
age of 41, posed after
spending 72 straight hours
working in his West Orange
laboratory on his "perfected"
phonograph.



Edison's Black Maria movie studio, mounted on,
turntable and equipped with hinged roof to utilize
direct sunlight..

Edison with his second wife, Mina Miller Edison.



A man posed with a kinetoscope in 1895: Ear tubes provided sound
that was synchronized with the images viewed from the peephole
mounted on the top of the cabinet.



Advertisement for the
Edison Concert Phonograph
in 1899.

Thomas Alva Edison Jr., at
the age of 21, in 1897.



Edison asleep on a laboratory bench in 1911.

In Vermont in

August 1918,
Edison poses with
other members of

camping trip (left
to right): Edison,
young Harvey
Firestone Jr.,
R.J.H. Deloach
(seated), John
Burroughs, Henry
Ford, and Harvey
Firestone.



Mourners lined up outside
the West Orange laboratory
to view Edison's bier.

Edison ceremonially
punches the laboratory's
time clock on his 74th

birthday in 1921.



 \ lBS

plete, the warden said, "Good-bye, William." This was the signal for
the assistant to throw the lever. When the circuit closed, Kemmler's body
convulsed and then froze as rigidly as if bronzed. After seventeen sec
onds, the presiding doctor declared Kemmler dead, the warden signaled
for the power to be cut, and the seated witnesses stood up, exhaling
with relief that the ordeal was apparently over.

"Great God! He is alive!" someone cried. "Turn on the current," im

plored another. The warden, who had been detaching the electrode on
Kemmler's head, stopped momentarily, then hastily reattached it. Every
one could see that Kemmler's chest was rising and falling. The doctor
told the warden to switch the current back on. The signal was given and
the lever was thrown again. The witnesses were so aghast, the sight of
blood drops that appeared on Kemmler's forehead so horrifying, the
stench of singed hair so strong, that no one present could later say with
certainty how long the second attempt at execution lasted. After this in
determinable period, the doctor again signaled for the current to be shut
off, and the witnesses stumbled out, all but a few retching.

One of the first individuals to leave the prison was the electrician
who had set up the apparatus. He went immediately to the telegraph of
fice and sent a message to Westinghouse: "Execution was an awful
botch. Kemmler was literally roasted to death."

"Far Worse Than Hanging" read the headline in the New York Times,
which characterized Kemmler's execution as nothing less than "a dis
grace to civilization." When asked for his reaction, George Westing
house drily remarked, "They could have done better with an axe." The
public could place the blame where it belonged, he said, and "it will not
be on us."

Westinghouse's prediction proved accurate: Blame did not attach to his
company. Nor did blame attach to the concept of an electric chair, only
on those who had handled the arrangements and done the testing. After
the U. S. Supreme Court refused an appeal of another person, Shibuya
Jugiro, convicted of murder and headed for death by electrocution, the
electric chair got another chance. Shibuya was one of four who died one
morning in 1891 at Sing Sing. By the end of the century, more than fifty



186 / 

had died in the chair. More than four thousand followed in the twenti

eth century, before lethal injection became an alternative to the chair, if
not its replacement, in all states but one (Nebraska). The shift away
from electricity shows that a century of experimentation was insuffi
cient to realize Edison's claim, made before the first execution, that elec
tric current was sufficient to kill the condemned person painlessly "in
the ten-thousandth part of a second."

Unaffected by this experimental work that state prisons undertook in
the early 1890s involving human subjects and lethal (or nor-quite-lethal)
electricity, the adoption of alternating current in the wider society accel
erated and the future for direct current dimmed. Edison General Electric

was the sales leader among the three largest power-and-light concerns,
but its costs were much higher, and its strategic positioning and growth
prospects the weakest. It was up against competitors that played by their
own rules (historian Forrest McDonald describes Thomson-Houston's
tactics pertaining to intellectual property as "scarcely distinguishable
from theft"). Samuel Insull appreciated the necessity of merging with
Thomson - Houston, even if Edison still did not. While Insull carried out

negotiations with the prospective merger partner, and at the same time
tried to coax Edison to acquiesce, he found himself politically isolated
at Edison General Electric. He was only thirty-two and had not yet
mastered the more subtle techniques of persuasion; by his own admis
sion in his memoirs, he had made "a good many enemies." For a few
weeks, Edison himself was "prej udiced" against him and the merger,
but Edison came around and the two men repaired their relationship.

In early 1892, the deal was done: Edison General Electric and
Thomson-Houston merged as nominal equals. The organization chart,
however, reflected a different understanding among the principals.
Thomson-Houston's chief executive, Charles Coffin, became the new
head and other Thomson-Houston executives filled out the other posi
tions. Insull was the only manager from the Edison side invited to stay,
which he did only briefly. From the outside, it appeared that Thomas



 \ 187

Edison and his coterie had arranged the combination from a position of
abject surrender. Edison did not want this to be the impression left in the
public mind, however. When the press asked him about the announce
ment, he said he had been one of the first to urge the merger. This was

not close to the truth, and is especially amusing when placed in juxtapo
sition to Alfred Tate's account of the moment when Tate, hearing news
of the merger first, had been the one to convey the news to Edison.

I always have regretted the abruptness with which I broke the
news to Edison but I am not sure that a milder manner and less

precipitate delivery would have cushioned the shock. I never be
fore had seen him change color. His complexion naturally was
pale, a clear healthy paleness, but following my announcement
it turned as white as his collar.

"Send for Insull, " was all he said as he left me standing in his
library.

Having collected himself before meeting with the reporters, Edison
could say with sincerity that he was too busy to "waste my time" on the
electric light. For the past three years, since he first realized that his direct
current system would ultimately be driven to the margins by alternating
current, he had been carting his affections elsewhere. The occasion of
the merger did shake him into a rare disclosure of personal shortcom
ing: He allowed that "I am not business man enough to spend time" in
the power-and-light business.

Edison found himself staring from the outside looking in, as others
who had the business acumen to extend electric light with newer tech
nology, unconstrained by the orthodoxies written by a direct-current
zealot, capitalized on the opportunity. In addition, Edison lost the ser
vices of Insull, who realized he had to leave Edison in order to work un
fettered as a chief executive.

At the time of the 1892 merger, Edison's name disappeared when the
new organization, the General Electric Company, was christened. Whether
this was by his own choice is not clear. Years later, Insull said that Edison



188 / 

refused to permit the Edison name to be associated with the new entity.
It is not difficult to picture Edison acting spitefully, angry that his name
sake company could no longer remain independent. When Edison's own
children grew to be adults, however, they told a very different story, of
his lifelong disappointment that "Edison" had been stripped from the
new company's name against his wishes. Both versions can be accom
modated: Perhaps Edison refused to allow the use of his name in 1892,
then, after the company narrowly escaped bankruptcy in the Panic of
1893 and grew into a far larger business, and the passage of years tem
pered his earlier ire, he came to feel regret about his decision-and
came to think of it not as his decision but that of an ungrateful Wall
Street. By that time, he had forgotten that he had become so discour
aged about the commercial prospects for his electric light, outshone by
the new entrants to the business, that he had given up on it.



CHAPTER NINE

FU N

HOPPING
INTO A new field and betting almost everything he

owned, Thomas Edison set off in a quest to make a name for
himself-in mining. The effort cost him five years of living

apart from his family and ended without success. But he enjoyed the ex
perience immensely and walked away without regrets. It was the one
time in the fifty years he lived as a public figure when he ignored what
was expected of him. It was also the one time when the man who
seemed cold at his core recorded in letters his affectionate feelings for
his wife.

Edison's adventure in mining began when he anticipated losing the
battle of the currents. He was weighed down with self-doubt, telling an
assistant that he had come to the realization that others on his staff

knew more about electricity than he did. He went even further, mo
rosely saying that he had never really known anything. But that did not
matter because "I'm going to do something now so different and so
much bigger than anything I've ever done before people will forget that
my name ever was connected with anything electrical. "

He had long been excited by the idea that electrically charged mag
nets could be used to process iron ore, separating the iron from other
material. In Menlo Park, more than ten years earlier, a laboratory note
book recorded experiments he had personally conducted to test the con
cept. Other inventors had also worked on "magnetic concentration," as
this process was called. Edison had never had the chance to devote

189



190 / 

sustained attention to it, however, and the idea had been stuck into a

cubbyhole. Now he was ready to pull it out and put it into practice.
New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania had considerable quantities
of low-grade iron ore, but it was so costly to refine by conventional
means that it drew few or no buyers. Edison was convinced that he
would be able to build a system of magnetic concentration that would
make easily mined, low-grade ore economically competitive with hard
to-extract, high-grade ore found elsewhere. In 1889, when he cashed
out his interest in the newly formed Edison General Electric, he had the
financial means to put his ideas to a real-world test. This money did not

stay in his pockets for long. He bought the Ogden iron mine in rural
northern New Jersey, about two miles south of Ogdensburg, and began
to erect a concentrating works of his own design to process ore.

The Edison system was designed to handle the iron-laden rock in as
large a chunk as the largest steam shovel of the day could bite off.
Rather than blowing it up using explosives, it would be sent to the
works to be crushed by rollers, breaking the rock into particles small
enough to be separated by magnets. In making his plans, Edison con
catenated three seemingly obvious insights that no one else had thought
to put together. First, it was cheaper to break up ore using the energy
provided by coal, which cost $3 a ton, rather than dynamite, at $100 a
ton. Second, a five-ton chunk of rock could be pulverized into powder if
the crushing rollers were built sufficiently large. Third, the rollers could
do their work at low operational cost, relying on centrifugal force after
steam power got them spinning at high speed. The scale of everything
was outsized.

Edison happily embraced a thousand and one problems encountered
in implementation. The rollers, for example, did not actually crush the
rock as much as knock it into smithereens with knobs that were at

tached to chilled iron plates bolted to the curved surfaces. The rock
turned out to be stubborn; its submission to the process required trial
and error. The technical issues were primarily mechanical in nature;
Edison had no claim to special expertise or advantages in this area, but
he relished this opportunity to play in a field entirely new to him.



FUN\191

When he bought the Ogden property in 1889 and assigned staff to
begin building the new concentrating works, he had not anticipated
that he would move to the mine site himself. He had a new wife, a new
estate, and a new laboratory in Orange that placed at his disposal
everything he had ever desired. He had a newborn child, Madeleine,
and another, Charles, would be born the next year, in 1890. Yet in
1891, when he had to accept the loss of control of his power-and-light
businesses, Edison could not enjoy his blessings at home and at the lab
oratory. He had resolved to make his mark in mining and prepared him
self to invest whatever it would take, and spend as much time away
from his family as required. This was the venture that he was deter
mined to make "so much bigger than anything I've ever done before."

It is hard to imagine a more stark contrast between the otherworldly
luxury of the Glenmont estate and the frontier-town conditions at the
Ogden site. At the mine, there was no town, so Edison and his lieu
tenants crowded into an old farmhouse, sardonically referred to as "the
White House." There were no amenities, no amusements, just work. In
the winter, the room temperature fell below freezing; washing up in the
morning required first melting the ice that had formed in the pitcher on
the nightstand. In the summer, temperatures were hotter "than the sev
enth section of hades," reported Edison, who added that the humidity
was "so thick that some of the fish from the Hopewell pond swam out
into the air." Ambient dust made life miserable, to the point that Edison
had difficulty retaining workers until he put a crew of seventeen to
work to control the problem. Convincing Mina to move up to the mine,
along with the children and the servants, was out of the question. So
Edison took up a routine of taking the train up early Monday morning,
then returning home on the last train Saturday night. One year turned
into two, and still the work was unfinished. It lasted five years.

The bare facts suggest that Edison was doing his best to avoid his sec
ond wife and young children, that this was a repeat of his earlier flight
to the western states in the summer of 1878, only in extreme form. The
reality was something different. For most of his life, Edison did not
record his feelings about personal matters, but the circumstances he



192 / 

found himself in during the Ogden years were an exception. He was at
the mine, Mina was at home in Glenmont, and they lived at a time
when the personal letter had yet to be displaced by the phone call. So
the normally taciturn Edison, who usually gave nothing away about his
innermost thoughts, wrote daily letters to Mina, whom he addressed by
the pet name "Billy." They are attentive, funny, and loving-unabashedly
so ("Darling Sweetest Loveliest Cutest ... "). Upon occasion, they are
quite explicit. "Last night I felt blue without you," he wrote Mina in
1895. "With a kiss like the swish of a 13 inch cannon projectile I remain
as always your lover."

Edison's letters to Mina reveal an aspect of his personality that would
not otherwise have been visible: his personal philosophy concerning
mental well-being. To Edison, unhappiness could be vanquished by sheer
force of will. In August 1895, when Mina and the children were at Chau

tauqua, and he was at Ogden, he responded to Mina's expression of the
"blues" with empathy, and tried as many therapeutic approaches as his
philosophy permitted. He humored her with stories about the dust
("some smart weed seeds have commenced to sprout out of the seams of

my coat"). He teased her that she was blue because of her disappoint
ment in him. He praised her intelligence ("There can't [be] 1 woman in
20,000 that is really as smart as yourself"). He lectured her on the med
ical basis of depression ("blues are from disordered liver"). He teased her
in a way that would make a mental-health professional today cringe (re
ferring to her in a babyish third-person voice: "I wonder if Billy Edison
truly loves me or does she just say so at times to keep me deceived. If she
really loved, why should she get the blues"). He advised her to stay away
from novels, take up newspaper reading, and "have all the fun you can."

He himself looked for fun in only one place-at work. He enjoyed
himself immensely at the mine, even when his colleagues' spirits dragged
as the years passed, the money disappeared, and customers for what
turned out to be expensively priced briquettes of processed iron ore
failed to materialize. His chief assistant, Walter Mallory, was "the most
dejected man you ever saw," Edison wrote Mina, but "your lover [is] as
bright and cheerful as a bumble bee in flower time. "



FUN\193

Edison took great pleasure in the novelty of the technical challenges
and in the opportunity to redeem his reputation as a savvy business

person, even though redemption never came. The low-grade iron ore in
New Jersey did not have a competitive chance once huge reserves of
high-grade ore were discovered in the Mesabi Range of northeastern
Minnesota; the Mesabi ore was easily mined near the surface and close
to economical shipping on Lake Superior. Well after the first Mesabi
mine opened in 1890, Edison remained pitiably hopeful about his Ogden
mine, even when objective facts made the future of its business appear
bleak to anyone else. In 1897, when failure was inevitable, he refused to

acknowledge the facts. Edison wrote a colleague, "My Wall Street
friends think I cannot make another success, and that I am a back num

ber, hence I cannot raise even $10,000 from them, but I am going to
show them that they are very much mistaken. I am full of vinegar yet."

Edison was not so emotionally invested, however, that he sold all of
his other assets in order to keep the business alive. Glenmont and his
laboratory remained untouched, and he was proud that the mine en
joyed a top credit rating because he would not permit it to take on a
penny of debt, even when it had exhausted his ready cash and the last of
the General Electric shares that he had held. He had to close the mine

repeatedly, then reopen when money from an unrelated line of business
came in, only to exhaust the new funds. The enterprise did not turn out
to be a complete waste: The rollers that were developed at the mine
were moved and adapted for use in a new line of business-producing
cement. For a while it would become a viable business, which Mallory
headed, but not an innovation in the same class as electric light.

In 1902, at a time when General Electric shares were trading at a his
toric high and well after Edison had sold his, Mallory happened to be
traveling with him and saw in the newspaper the eye-popping closing
priee. Edison asked what his stake would have been worth had he held
on to it. Mallory quickly worked out the number: over $4 million.
Hearing this, Edison remained silent, keeping a serious expression for
about fifteen seconds. Then his face lit up and he said, "Well, it's all
gone, but we had a good time spending it."



194/ 

The story would be retold by Edison's hagiographers many times. The
evidence suggests that Edison did have a jolly time, which, to him, was
well worth the $4 million. He did not include in the calculations, how

ever, the opportunity that he lost to profit from his own inventions,
beginning with the phonograph that would bring into being the modern
entertainment industry. It would be others who began to make money
offering to the public recorded entertainment. Edison, distracted in the
pursuit of his own fancies, was slow to observe the limitless business

opportunities made possible by the commercialization of fun.
Edison could not take the pulse of a public from which he was iso

lated. First, cloistered within Glenmont and his new lab in Orange, and
then even more isolated in unpopulated mining country, Edison was not
well situated to listen to a mass consumer market clamoring for the op
portunity to spend money on popular music. Work was the only form
of fun he was personally familiar with; it took him a long time to even
consider marketing the phonograph as a device for entertainment. As
late as 1892, he told Alfred Tate, "I don't want the phonograph sold for
amusement purposes." Tate explained in his memoirs that Edison was
"unable to visualize the potentialities of the amusement field." By the
next year, Edison had begun to relent, but only a tiny bit. He was able
to picture the phonograph being marketed to the individual household
for the" best in Oratory and Music."

The masses did not want to turn their parlors into a music apprecia
tion class-they had neither the parlors nor phonographs, which were
still expensive, nor hunger for classical music. But entrepreneurs mate
rialized to give the people what they wished to hear. They added a
gizmo to the Edison phonograph and came up with the "nickel-in-the
slot" machine, the earliest coin-operated jukebox. It only played a single
selection, but many machines could be placed in a saloon, hotel lobby,
or amusement hall. Each was equipped with rubber listening tubes that
were placed in the ears of the paying patron, which permitted an indi
vidual to enjoy music in public space without disturbing others. Public
health authorities worried, however, that the listening tubes were "dis-



FUN \ 195

ease breeders"; the park commissioners in Philadelphia ordered the ma
chines removed from park grounds for this reason.

Phonograph dealers who invested in the machines discovered that the
nickels added up to considerable profits, even after they turned over 50
percent of revenues to the patent holder, the Automatic Phonograph
Exhibition Company. A San Francisco distributor said in 1890 that he
collected more than $4,000 in about six months. That money was not
earned from the "best in Oratory and Music." The impresarios of the
nickel-in-the-slot machine provided whatever was not classical: popular
music supplemented with programs of prurient storytelling that brought
occasional censorship.

Even before others had found a way to earn profits from recorded
music, Edison had begun thinking about a machine that did more. The
"Kinetoscope Moving View" would do "for the Eye what the phono
graph does for the Ear." The first version was modeled on Edison's
phonograph, and was rather too ambitious, attempting to provide not
only images but synchronized sound. This very early progenitor of
modern cinema-only one of many that tinkerers around the world
were working on-did not come close to resembling the machine that
would cast mesmerizing images that filled large screens, for it was con
ceived on a microscopic scale. One cylinder was used to play back
sound and a second one to provide visuals with thousands of tiny im
ages, each taken as an individual photograph by a conventional camera
and painstakingly mounted on the cylinder, one by one. They were
arranged in a spiral so that they could be viewed continuously through
a microscope. In theory, it was a clever arrangement; in practice, how
ever, it was impossible to make the images lie flat and appear clearly.

Edison did not have time to work out solutions to the problems as he
had done when the incandescent light was his top priority. He con
ceived of the kinetoscope just as he decided that ore milling was going
to be his main project. Edison reassigned one of his principal assistants



196 / 

at the mine, William Kennedy Laurie Dickson, whom Edison knew was
also a talented photographer, to head up work on the kinetoscope. It
was Dickson who would advance the project with myriad contribu
tions-and continue to do so after he parted with Edison on less-than
amicable terms in 1895 and put his talents and experience to work for

competitors.
No one had yet figured out how to rapidly open and close the cam

era's shutter-dozens of times a second-while capturing crisp images
on film that was in constant motion. A much improved camera was in
vented, but not by Edison or his assistants. Etienne-Jules Marey, the
same distinguished French scientist who earlier had worked on record
ing human vocalization, had designed an ingenious camera: It recorded
sixty images a second on a long continuous strip of film, which was
pulled by a cam in a deliberatively jerky fashion to stop the film mo
mentarily, so that light could saturate the film and capture motion. Not
only had Marey made these crucial advances, he was happy to share
what he had learned with the scientific community. When Edison visited
Paris in 1889 for the Paris Exposition, he was cordially received by
Marey and was presented with a copy of Marey's book, which detailed
in French his recent photographic work. Dickson, who had remained
back at the laboratory in New Jersey but was fluent in French, likely
had learned of Marey's most recent work by reading French periodicals
that he bought for the laboratory.

In Dickson's account of the events of that year, Edison does not play
much more than an honorific role. While Edison was in Paris, Dickson
readied a prototype system that was far ahead of its time-projecting
images upon a screen with synchronized sound. Upon the inventor's re
turn to the lab, Dickson appeared on the screen, raised his hat, and said,
"Good morning, Mr. Edison, glad to see you back. I hope you are satis
fied with the kineto-phonograph."

This feat was accomplished by using a tachistoscope, which used a
stroboscopic light and a revolving disc that could only hold a few im
ages. It would not serve as the next step in the technical evolution of

moving images, but it did show Dickson's talents. Edison took no imme-



FUN\197

diate notice, however, and temporarily shifted Dickson back to the min
ing project. Another month went by before Edison returned his attention
to moving images and drew up a preliminary patent application for a
motion-picture system that replaced the cylinder with a filmstrip, like
Marey's. But mining remained his pet project. Two more years passed
before a working prototype was ready for a public demonstration.

The kinetoscope that was unveiled in 1891 was a console made of
wood, about twenty inches square and standing four feet high, that re
sembled its older sibling, the nickel-in-the-slot phonograph. On top was
mounted an eyepiece for the peephole, through which the viewer saw a
moving image, backlit and magnified, as the film moved past the open
ing. The film was spliced together as one continuous fifty-foot loop,
arranged on rollers. The film feed was powered by a battery-powered
electric motor. In all, it was a mechanical marvel. Still, what the eye saw
fell well short of a sensual feast. The images were small, and the first
commercial film, Blacksmith Scene, ran only twenty seconds.

The machine was a novelty item, and Edison did not accord it much
commercial potential. When he filed for a patent in the United States,
his attorney urged him to file for foreign patents, too. Edison decided
not to do so, however, when told it would cost $150. Legend has him
saying at the time, "It isn't worth it." Without the protection of patents
in other countries, however, he was vulnerable to legal attack. Patent
disputes quickly flared and would last for more than twenty years.

When Edison visited Chicago in May 1891, reporters asked him if he
was preparing to exhibit an "electrical novelty" for the World's Colum
bian Exposition that the city would host in 1893. This was going to be
the largest-and the most influential, it turned out-of the nineteenth
century world fairs. (Its White City would provide one visitor, children's
writer Frank Baum, the inspiration for the Emerald City of Oz.) This in

quiry handed Edison an invitation to talk up his kinetoscope, which, even
if not yet ready for commercial release, seemed certain to be complete
within two years, well in time for the fair. He chose instead to play the
role of the Wizard, promising the never-before-conceived. "My inten
tian," he declared, "is to have such a happy combination of photography



198 / 

and electricity that a man can sit in his own parlor and see depicted
upon a curtain the forms of the players in opera upon a distant stage
and hear the voices of the singers." What he is describing-color visu
als and audio, capturing a performance in a distant locale, in real time,
projected upon a large flat surface-seems rather close to what we
would come to know as color television. Edison declared he was confi

dent that it would be "perfected" in time for the opening of the fair.
Such a claim might appear to be the product of the feverish, and

incorrigibly self-deceiving, mind of the Wizard of Oz. But Edison's ex
pectation of the perfection of color television was more a case of
absentmindedness-he was not immersed in the work on the kineto

scope as Dickson was. Standing at a distance, and preoccupied with
mining, Edison gave his own motion pictures and sound only a half
glance. If he did not face the practical issues on a daily basis himself, he
was inclined to assume that the difficult was easy, and that the impos
sible took just a little bit longer.

The responsibility of readying the kinetoscope for the Chicago fair
fell squarely upon Dickson's shoulders, and the burden proved too
much to bear: Soon exhausted, he was unable to work at all for almost
three months. At the same time, the Panic of 1893 imperiled Edison's
ore mill; he had no time to return to the kinetoscope. In the meantime,
Tate had proceeded on the assumption that all would be ready in time
and had organized a syndicate, including a brother-in-law of one of the
exposition's commissioners, that secured a coveted concession to oper
ate twenty-five machines on the grounds. The fair opened in May 1893
and introduced to the world wonders such as the Ferris wheel, Cracker
Jacks, and Juicy Fruit gum. Before closing in October, it drew 27.5 mil
lion visitors. Those 27.5 million visitors did not get a look at Edison's

kinetoscope, however, as the machines were not completed until the
next year, too la te for the fair.

The development of the machines could have been accelerated, but
only if Edison relinquished his notion that they were only a novelty. In
February 1894, he wrote the photographer Eadweard Muybridge, "I
have constructed a little instrument which I call a Kinetograph, with a



Fu N \ 199

nickel and slot attachment and some 25 have been made but I am very
doubtful if there is any Commercial in it and fear they will not earn
their costs. "

Astute observers noticed at the time that Edison had made the wrong
call about the future of the phonograph, too. "The wizard Edison's
idea" that the phonograph would be adopted as a machine for office
transcription "has not proved to be the success which its famous cre
ator thought it would be," the New York Morning Advertiser noticed.
But as a source of amusement, it was doing well. One entrepreneur,
Charles L. Marshall, had installed five thousand nickel-gobbling ma
chines in phonograph parlors. He had developed a simple rule of
thumb: Give the public what it wanted, and that meant avoiding what
he called "classical songs" like "Thou Art Like Unto a Flower." Music
that appealed to a less-refined sensibility-he singled out "Throw Him
Down, McCloskey" and "One of His Legs Is Longer Than It Really
Ought to Be" as exemplars-brought in fifteen times as much revenue
per day.

It was clear to everyone but Edison that the kinetoscope, once it was
finally ready for release, would be a tremendous source of fun of all
kinds-the silly, the spectacular, and the ribald. Even before the kineto
scope was released, an Albany newspaper reported on rumors that it
would be perfectly suited for recording a boxing match, permitting
hundreds of thousands to witness a match within a week after the

event. Edison, however, continued to lecture the public in a churchy
voice about the machine's suitability for performances at the Metropol
itan Opera House in New York.

His sermonizing did not guide actual practice back at the laboratory,
however, which was in the hands of Dickson. On the laboratory's
grounds, Dickson had directed workmen to build the "Black Maria," a
long, oddly shaped movie studio covered in black tarpaper ("Black
Maria" was a slang expression for a police wagon, which the studio re
sembled). It had a retractable roof and was mounted on a turntable so
that the studio could be moved in tandem with the sun. Significantly,
the first celebrity visitor Dickson invited out to be filmed was not a



200 / 

prima donna from the Met but rather "Sandow, the Strongman." The

bodybuilder had agreed to come for a $250 fee, which he offered to
waive were he granted the privilege of shaking the hand of the great
Edison himself. Edison appeared after Sandow and his entourage had
arrived and did his assigned part, and Sandow did his, striking various
poses that showed off musculature that is preserved for the ages thanks
to the new invention. It does not, however, include a picture of Edison

"feeling Sandow's muscles with a curiously comical expression on his
face," as reported by the Orange Chronicle. Nor does it capture
Sandow's enjoyment of his own strength. He asked one of the labora
tory assistants if he would mind being "chucked" out of the door while
the cameras ran. No thanks, the assistant demurred, but Sandow pro
ceeded anyway, grabbing him with one hand and sending him airborne
through the door-too quickly for the cameras to capture. In other
short features, Dickson and his helpers offered a little suggestion of sex,
in the flashing legs of a Spanish dancer (Carmencita), and a good help
ing of violence (Cockfight). They were clearly not constrained by Edi
son's high-minded goals for the new medium.

Alfred Tate saw the commercial possibilities that Edison could not,
and invested in the first kinetoscope parlor, set up in a small space, 1155
Broadway, that had been a shoe shop. In April 1894, he and his brother
received ten machines, arranged in two rows. These early machines did
not have coin mechanisms, so Tate planned on offering patrons a ticket
for twenty-five cents that would entitle the holder to look at the pro
grams running in five machines in one row. In his memoirs, he tells of a

great opening day.
It was two o'clock on Saturday afternoon; the machines had just

been installed in preparation for the shop's planned opening on Mon
day. In the meantime, Tate had placed a small printed announcement in
the store window, along with a plaster bust of Edison. As he sat with his
brother and the parlor's mechanic, a small crowd gathered outside to
look at the bust of Edison. Tate impulsively decided to open the shop
for a few hours and see if they couldn't pull in enough money by dinner
time to treat themselves to an elaborate spread at nearby Delmonico's.



FUN \ 201

Tate volunteered to man the ticket booth at the front. The doors were

opened-and what followed was a blur of feverish business with no
time for dinner. They could not get the place cleared before 1 :00 A.M.
on Sunday, and had to look for an all-night restaurant. Without adver
tising, they had taken in $120 on the first day.

The tale does not reveal, however, whether a given patron would
clamor to see the same twenty-second film multiple times. Novelty only
went so far. On the movie-production side, Dickson and his associates
were limited by their own creative resources and, even more, by the lim
its of the technology. Simply put, the short filmstrip did not have
enough capacity to offer a narrative. How profitable a business could
be built upon such a base, unable to tell a story of any kind, limited to

showing a glimpse of a bodybuilder, an acrobat, or a dancer?
Edison and his circle could not see how to advance the medium be

yond a proof-of-concept novelty. It was a group of young entrepreneurs
who had no prior affiliation with Edison's laboratory who eventually
pulled the industry forward. Two brothers, Grey and Otway Latham,
and their college friend Enoch Rector, visited Tate's kinetoscope parlor
not long after it had opened in April 1894, and emerged with a vision
for building a business not upon acrobatic exhibitions but upon prize
fights. They intuitively understood the critical component of a boxing
match: It was a self-contained narrative, with a beginning, a middle,
and an end. Sandow, preening before the camera, lacked a story; a box

ing match, however, was a story that played out within a roped-off rect
angle, in fast-forward mode, completed in a matter of minutes.

If the Latham brothers and their friend could persuade the Edison
Manufacturing Company to film actual matches exclusively on their be
half, they had no doubt that the exhibition, delivered by kinetoscopes,
would be a smashing success. After securing preliminary encourage
ment from Edison's company, the group, along with another partner,
formed the Kinetoscope Exhibiting Company for the express purpose
of showing boxing matches.

No fight could be presented in full using twenty-second reels, how
ever. Rector, who had a background in engineering, worked with the



202 / 

personnel at the Edison laboratory to adapt both the camera and the
display box to accommodate a reel that was three times as long, with
three times the playing time. With a capacity of sixty seconds, an entire,
albeit shortened, round (the standard round was three minutes) could
be captured, with a beginning and an end.

The new equipment was put to work in the Black Maria almost im

mediately. On 15 June 1894, Michael Leonard, an established fighter,
met the lesser-known Jack Cushing for a six-round bout that was filmed
by Dickson and his assistant, William Heise. In order to fit the cameras
into the small space, the ring was only twelve feet square. In between
each one-minute round, the fighters enjoyed seven minutes of rest,
while the camera operators changed the film. This was pronounced a
"great and glorious idea" by one sportswriter, who observed that the
long interval between rounds enabled the fighters to recover their
breath and "start to work each time fresh and nimble as though nothing
had happened."

A prizefight did not help to advance high culture, but Edison took
great personal interest in the event nonetheless. He was the official mas
ter of ceremonies (even though boxing was illegal in New Jersey), and an
enthusiastic spectator, feinting and "punching" along with the others
who were on hand, fighting a "battle in pantomime, after the fashion of
all novices," said one account. The New York World did its part to pique
the curiosity of prospective kinetoscope customers by reporting that in
the excitement there was confusion about the outcome of the fight. Af
terward, Leonard landed a good verbal punch, saying he would have hit
Cushing more but "Mr. Edison treated me right, and I didn't want to be
too quick for his machine." Cushing claimed that he was too busy look
ing at the camera, trying to keep a pleasant expression on, to pay atten
tion to what Leonard was doing. It didn't matter, he said, because
Leonard was not "muscular enough to fold towels in a Turkish bath."

Each of the six rounds of the fight was placed in a separate kineto
scope, which had been enlarged to accommoda te the 150 feet of film
that rested in vertical coils. Patrons were charged ten cents for the privi
lege of seeing one round, and if all went well, true fight fans would pay



FUN\203

to see all six. The plan went well indeed. When the Kinetoscope Ex
hibiting Company opened for business on Nassau Street in Lower Man
hattan in August 1896, the storefront was packed with eager throngs
on the first day. On the second, lines formed into the street, prompting a
call to the police for help in crowd control.

The success proved the drawing power of boxing for the new me
dium, and the Latham brothers moved quickly to arrange for another
match, with a bigger name. They approached James Corbett, the reign
ing heavyweight champion, and offered him the opportunity to earn a
sizable prize against a local patsy, Peter Courtney. It would be a "finish

fight," going however many rounds were needed before one of the com
batants was knocked out or unable to rise from his stool. Both the

sponsors and Corbett showed considerable sophistication in working
out the details of the arrangement. The Lathams insisted that Corbett

grant to their company exclusive film rights; Corbett, on his part, de
manded, and received, a clause specifying royalty payments for every
set of film prints that would be put on exhibition; this proved a brilliant
stroke on his part.

Like a modern-day fight promoter preparing a pay-per-view event,
the Lathams worried about the possibility of a quick knockout-this
would keep only a single kinetoscope busy instead of a line of machines
for each round. They also did not want a fight that went on too long; a
finish that came in the thirtieth round would come well after the pocket
money, if not the patience, of the average fight fan would be exhausted.
From a strictly commercial perspective, they decided the ideal length
would be six rounds. But how could a genuine "finish fight" last a pre
determined number of rounds? Simple: The remuneration offered to the
dominant fighter was structured to achieve the desired result. The La
thams offered Corbett $4,750 of the $5,000 purse, but in order to collect
he had to knock out his opponent in the sixth round-not earlier, not
later. "You can bet I'll do the trick, too," Corbett predicted prior to the
event, "for it's too much money to let slip out of one's grasp."

Corbett was a good choice to serve as the leading man in this drama.
He was a professional actor as well as fighter, performing on Broadway



204 / 

at the time in Gentleman Jack. He had become so accustomed to draw
ing attention to himself that he had lost the ability to become publicly
invisible, which was now a problem. Local police had been angered by
the flagrant violation of the state ban on boxing when Edison's labora
tory had hosted the first filmed fight a few months earlier. On the day of
Corbett's fight, 7 September 1894, when he and his large retinue caught
the Christopher Street ferry for New Jersey, they were supposed to do
their utmost to travel incognito to avoid being arrested. Upon disem
barking from the train station, he and his entourage did divide up into
two groups to evade detection on the last leg of their journey to the
Black Maria. But Corbett could not resist displaying his customary sar
torial splendor (natty checked-cloth suit; immaculate white shirt; dia
monds nestled upon black tie) and flashing the three jewel-encrusted
rings worn on his right pinkie.

As before, the Black Maria had room only for the makeshift ring and
a few invited guests. The photographic equipment was much improved:
One account said that the rounds lasted ninety seconds, with only a
one- to two-minute interval between each. Corbett was careful and

made sure that the fight lasted exactly as long as the sponsors had re
quested. He knocked his opponent down in the third round and could
easily have put him away then, but he backed off so that the show could
go on. A bit later, Corbett connected with a left to the jaw, then with a

right, landing on the same spot, and Courtney went down. He tried to
get up, then pitched forward, unconscious. The referee counted off ten
seconds and the fight was over. Wonder of wonders, this "finish fight"
finished in the sixth round.

Afterward, when a local judge heard about the event, he charged a
grand jury to investigate. Edison was summoned to appear, but Mina
told the authorities that he was up at Ogdensburg, working at the mine
site (the documentary record leaves open the question of where Edison
was on the day of the fight itself). The local law-enforcement apparatus
soon found other matters of greater interest, and no charges were
pressed. But the fact that Edison was indeed spending most of his time
at the mine is important because it goes a long way in explaining why



FUN\20S

he committed the single largest blunder in his career as inventor-cum
businessperson. He failed to see what was needed to fully realize the
commercial value of the Corbett-Courtney fight that had just been
filmed. It had a professional actor as its star performer; it had drama
with a satisfying denouement; it was the right duration to maximize
box-office revenue without antagonizing patrons-it had everything
but a means of presentation that could handle large numbers of cus
tomers simultaneously. For that, the images had to be freed from the
confined space of the kinetoscope box. They needed to be projected so
that a roomful of people could enjoy them at the same time. Anyone
who spent time with the exhibitors would have seen the problem in an
instant. Edison, who had seventy-ton rollers on his mind, missed it

completely.
The Latham brothers, however, saw immediately the need for a pro

jection system. As pleased as they were by the profits they collected from
exhibiting the Corbett-Courtney fight in kinetoscopes, they felt even a
greater degree of frustration in the inefficiency of a display that could
only serve one patron at a time. The young men invited their father,
Woodville Latham, a professor of chemistry at West Virginia University,
to visit their Nassau Street parlor and render a scientific opinion: Was
there any way they would be able to project the miniature images upon a
sheet? Optics was not the elder Latham's academic field, but he told
them that he was certain that any photographed image could be pro
jected on a screen. His interest piqued, he joined them in launching a
crash project to develop movie projection. Rather than working with
Edison's laboratory as the Latham brothers had done earlier when they
wanted to increase the running time of a kinetoscope reel, this time they
set off on their own. A small room, twelve by fifteen feet, was rented to
serve as the new lab. Eugene Lauste, an expert mechanic and former em

ployee of Edison's, was the first person hired. The tiny space became still
smaller when Lauste set up his cot and took up residence there.

The Lathams were not the only exhibitors frustrated with Edison's
kinetoscope, and the others urged Edison to introduce a projection ma
chine. Edison was adamant: no. He reasoned that the peephole machines



206 / 

were selling well and at a good profit. The problem with projection was
that it would work all too well-if he replaced the inefficient kineto
scope with projection systems that could serve up the show to every
one, "there will be a use for maybe about ten of them in the whole
United States." He concluded, "Let's not kill the goose that lays the
golden egg."

At Edison's lab in Orange, without his boss's approval, W. K. L. Dick
son carried out research on film projection on his own and shared his

findings with a friend who was a keen listener: Otway Latham. And when
Dickson accepted an invitation to try a projection experiment in a physics
laboratory at Columbia, who should show up but Otway's father, Pro
fessor Latham. The Lathams made an offer to Dickson-come join us
and we'll give you a quarter-share interest in the business-but Dickson
was unwilling to make the leap. When Edison got word of his fraternizing
with the Lathams, however, and failed to reassure Dickson that he be
lieved Dickson's dealings had been perfectly honorable, Dickson felt he
had no choice but to resign. The exact chronology of what he did and
what he knew at various points preceding his resignation would be the
subject of much litigation that followed. But regardless of intellectual
property issues, Edison lost the one person on his staff who would have
been most valuable to him in developing a projection system.

The Lathams and Dickson had discovered that sending a bright light
through a moving strip of film did not project satisfactorily because any
given image did not absorb enough light before it sped on. The Lathams
came up with a partial solution, which was to make the film wider, pro
viding more area for the light to catch as each image went by. The pro
jected images were about the size of a window and good enough to
unveil publicly. Professor Latham gave a demonstration of his newly
christened Pantoptikon to reporters in April 1895.

Press accounts were less interested in the pantoptikon than in Edi
son's critique of it. Here was an opportunity for Edison to offer a few

gracious words to the competition, a modest outfit that only had finan
cial resources to produce the one demonstration unit and not much else.
And still Edison could not bring himself to tip his hat. Going solely on



FUN\207

what the reporter described to him, Edison claimed that a kinetoscope
could do everything that the Latham machine purported to do. Why
was everyone making such a fuss about projecting pictures? He'd done
that long before, but the pictures had been crude. Wait two or three
months, he promised, and "we will have the kinetoscope perfected, and
then we will show you screen pictures." Professor Latham wrote a letter
to the editor in response that took Edison's self-flattering account apart,
point by point.

A few weeks later, the Lathams, no longer dependent upon the Black
Maria, photographed a boxing match on the roof of Madison Square
Garden, and on 20 May 1895, offered the public the first showing of
motion pictures on a screen. The Lathams' projector, now renamed the

Eidoloscope, provided a "Life Size" reproduction of the fight, and a
broadside printed for the occasion promised, "During the Exhibition
the Audience will be Comfortably Seated." This was not a claim that
Edison could ever make for his peephole machines, which required
standing, stooping, and squinting. And if this was not galling enough,
newspapers around the country seemed to be reveling in Edison's
eclipse by unknown newcomers. "Edison Not in It!" shouted one head
line in a Chicago paper, followed by "Kenetoscope [sic] Outclassed by
Prof. Latham's Newest."

By the time the Wizard came down from the mountain and noticed
what he had missed, he was too late. Not only in the United States, but
also in France, England, and Germany, inventors were attacking the
screen-projection problem simultaneously. In the race in the United
States, the Lathams appeared to be in the lead. But they failed to under
stand that the wider film used in their eidoloscope could not draw in
enough light to provide an image that was bright and large enough to be
of commercial service. The fundamental problem that bedeviled all of
the early attempts at projection remained: insufficient light. Two inven
tors who lived in Washington, D.C., Thomas Armat and C. Francis Jen
kins, were the first to figure out the solution-the moving images needed
to stop momentarily, so that enough light could pass through to produce
a clear image, just as when filming, the camera had to stop momentarily



208 / 

to allow the light that came in through the aperture to produce a photo
chemical reaction and register. Their projector, the Phantascope, moved
the film in the only way that could produce bright pictures and smooth
appearing action: by stopping each frame as it passed by the lamp.

Only in folklore does the world beat a path to the inventor of the bet
ter mousetrap. In September 1895, the world simply shrugged when
Armat and Jenkins publicly unveiled their new machine in a corner of
the Cotton States and International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. A
local paper gave it brief mention, but only a few visitors stopped by, and
the inventors had nothing to show for their first attempt at marketing.
The two soon quarreled over assignment of the patents-given the dis
mal state of their business, this showed a hardy optimism-and dis
solved their partnership.

Edison's largest kinetoscope distributor, Raff & Gammon, begged
Edison in early October to complete the "Screen Machine" that he had
promised them. The next day, Edison personally handwrote a letter that
showed what was currently most on his mind. It was addressed not to
Raff & Gammon, but to the Ingersoll-Sergeant Drill Company: "Gen
tlemen, We are using six of your drills at our mine and find them per
fectly satisfactory." One cannot help but admire the obstinate way in
which Edison refused to let go of his failing mining project. He jeopar
dized his own role in the commercialization of fun because he was having
a great deal of fun himself, pursuing at his ore mill his own bliss, in his
own way. He was happily immersed even though it entailed living for
long, lonely stretches up at the mine without Mina. (His letters reveal
his loneliness. They also provide a tiny contribution to the history of
sex. In one letter, he tells her a joke he had just heard: How can one rec
ognize the modern woman, or so-called Coming Woman? "The answer
is 'Quite easily by their panting or short breaths.'" Concerned that she
would not be able to "study out the joke," he told her not to show it to
just anybody" because it is bad.")

While Raff & Gammon beseeched Edison to invent a Screen Ma

chine, young Armat, realizing he lacked the means to get the attention
of the marketplace, approached Raff & Gammon about acting as his



FUN\209

distributor. He received a skeptical reception-Edison himself was un
able to produce a projection system that worked, so how could an un
known inventor succeed? Armat offered to pay Raff & Gammon's

expenses to come visit him in Washington to see for themselves. The
phantascope proved to be all that Armat had claimed, and his patent
solid. Raff and his partner prepared to abandon Edison and his in
stantly obsolete kinetoscope, if they could not persuade Edison to lend
the one asset that he possessed that remained valuable: his name. Their
plan also required Armat to swallow his pride and accept a marketing
plan that depended on his remaining invisible. Explaining that they as
sumed that "you, like ourselves, have gone in this thing with a view to
making all the money possible," they explained that many people had
been waiting for the past year for Edison to perfect a projector and
would continue to hold off purchasing a machine offered by anyone
else, no matter what its virtues. "In order to secure the largest profit in
the shortest time it is necessary that we attach Mr. Edison's name in

some prominent capacity to this new machine.... We regard this as
simply a matter of business and we trust that you will view it strictly in
the same light."

Armat accepted the arrangement, and, more surprising, Edison did
too, showing a willingness to use his name to market a better invention
than he had been able to produce. He had not been willing to do the
same when approached by the graphophone interests. To obscure its
origins, the phantascope was given a new name, the Vitascope, and
when it made its debut at Koster and Bial's Music Hall in New York in

April 1896, projecting life-sized images on a screen twenty by thirteen
feet, it was described as "the ingenious inventor's latest toy." Edison
followed the script to which he had agreed and remained silent.

In July, Los Angeles showed an appreciation of the vitascope that ex
ceeded even New York's. The inaugural film program offered a dancing
sequence, then melodrama involving Uncle Sam knocking a diminutive
bully, John Bull, to his knees, street scenes from New York, more danc
ing, and then the first medium-range close-up of a kiss. The Los Angeles
Times said "the audience fairly shrieked and howled approval" and



210 / 

called the vitascope "an instantaneous success." Sports programming
demonstrated the technology's capabilities in most thrilling fashion. At
another site, the Corbett-Courtney fight was offered in a size that for
the first time was like "actual life." In the first week in Los Angeles,
some twenty thousand people saw a vitascope program, and another
ten thousand had to be turned away.

The vitascope's success was credited to Edison's ingenuity, which

gave a bright luster to his star. Edison also could derive pleasure as the
head of a new business that had not existed before: film production.
One of the prerogatives as studio head was the ability to sign off on the
creative agenda. In 1897, one of his company's twenty-second features,
Mr. Edison at Work in His Chemical Laboratory, had a cast consisting
of just himself, playing the role of wizard, missing only a costume and
pointed cap. It was filmed in the Black Maria, which had been outfitted
with shelves filled with glassware and with a workbench overflowing
with retorts and burners, everything needed for a fake laboratory. By
donning a costume-a white lab coat-and doing nothing but dash
from one end of the stage to the other, moving this piece of lab equip
ment here, and then there, pretending to be engaged in an experiment
so demanding that he had no time to look up from his work and peer
directly into the camera, Edison could fully inhabit the persona that had
been placed upon him twenty years earlier, when he more closely lived
the part. He intuitively understood the way invisibility heightened
celebrity, but it could not be taken to an extreme; he needed to make
rare appearances, too. For the public hungry to see the man at work,
the film appeared to give them exactly that, albeit a glimpse that only
lasted twenty seconds.



CHAPTER TEN



THE
PUBLIC'S INTEREST in Thomas Edison's inventions rose

and fell, as announcements of coming wonders would pique in
terest and then delays in the delivery of those wonders would

disappoint. Over time, however, his fame acquired an indestructible
sheath and eclipsed the attention accorded to the individual inventions
themselves. It was Thomas Edison, the person, to whom the public be
came most attached during his lifetime. Edison realized this, and
worked unceasingly to protect the most distilled expression of his per
son: his name. "Thomas A. Edison" was an estimable invention, too.

In the public's view, by the late 1890s anything associated with Edi
son's name was presumed to be blessed by the inventor's brilliance. The
passage of time worked in Edison's favor, erasing from collective mem

ory the earlier disappointments that had followed hyperbolic predic
tions. So positive was the association with his name that it was attached
to a boggling array of goods, such as those offered by the Edison Chem
ical Company, a manufacturer of printing ink. If customers failed to
make the connection between the name and the famous inventor, they
could not miss the "Wizard" that was featured in its advertising. What
the company did not draw attention to was this fact: The Edison Chem

ical Company had no tie to Thomas Edison. Its founders had found a
man with the last name of Edison-one C. M. Edison, no relation
who was willing to license marketing rights to his name for a fee.

This had vexed the other Edison, Thomas, who won a court order

211



212 / 

that enjoined the company from using his surname. The matter did not
end there, however. The Edison Chemical Company reorganized itself
as the Thomas A. Edison, Jr., Chemical Company, having enlisted the
famous man's twenty-five-year-old namesake son.

Thomas Edison Jr., Edison's second oldest child from his first mar

riage, had left St. Paul's preparatory school without a diploma, hoping
to become an inventor, too. His father had created positions for him at
the West Orange laboratory and up at the Ogden mine, but Junior felt
extreme frustration with his father for not recognizing his inventive tal
ents. He was also frustrated with himself, for being intimidated by his
father and remaining mute. In May 1897, then twenty-one-year-old Ju
nior wrote Mina, his stepmother, from the mine about his relationship
with his father:

I probably never will be able to please him, as am afraid it's not in
me. But I shall never give up trying. If I could only talk to him the
way I want to, perhaps everything may be different. I have many
ideas of my own, which sometimes-yes-I may say on all occa
sions I would like to ask him or tell him about but they never
leave my mouth, and are soon forgotten, perhaps where they be
long, perhaps not. This I would like to have him to decide.

Later that year, writing from a hotel in New York City, Junior again
confided to his stepmother that his father often told him that he was
"impractical." He vowed to do his best to become a practical person,
"but it is a difficult matter to change one's nature in a short time." His
ambition to become an inventor remained firm.

Within a few days, his dream was realized: He became a famous in
ventor, at least in the eyes of the New York Herald, which ran a long,
credulous profile titled "Edison, Jr., Wizard." The young man was cred
ited with inventing an incandescent bulb superior to his father's and

"developing a formidable rivalry to his illustrious parent in his own line."
The powerful effect of his name mesmerized the Herald's reporter, who
took on faith Junior's claims about his invention, about financial backing



\213

from unnamed powerful figures, and about his autobiography (he claimed
he had left school at the age of eleven and subsequently continued his
education at his father's elbow).

junior's claimed invention and related business interests were not ver
ified by independent sources. He discovered, however, that his fame,
even if inherited, led to new opportunities. He soon landed a publicly
visible role at the Electrical Exhibition staged in Madison Square Garden
in 1898. The position did not come with major responsibilities-he was
head of the decoration committee, whose largest contribution to the ex
hibition was an illuminated fountain-but Junior used the opportunity
to speak to the press about the life he led as inventor. A small accident
that damaged his desk, caused by a fireworks-sized explosive used in an
exhibit of miniature gunboats, gave him the opportunity to set his jaw
bravely and proclaim his lack of fear as he persevered down the danger
ous path he had chosen. "I never expect to die a natural death," he said
in an interview; "I feel confident I will be blown up some day."

In fact, Junior was not actually staring down death in dedicated pur
suit of new inventions. His assignment was to design the arrangement
of decorative electric lights for the exhibition's fountain. The most plau
sible explanation for why the exhibition's sponsor had hired Thomas
Edison Jr. is that he possessed a brand name suitable for marketing the
show, which immediately followed another show in the Garden that pi
oneered the exploitation of famous names, Buffalo Bill's Wild West
Show. Thomas Edison Sr. would have been the best draw, perhaps even
better than Annie Oakley, but he was not available; the next best thing,
therefore, was Thomas Edison Jr. So it was he, and only he, who was
mentioned by name in the New York Times as the guest celebrity on
hand at the exhibition, sipping tea that had been boiled on an electric

range, a novelty, and munching a tiny biscuit cooked in an "electrically
heated oven," another novelty. This time he was not credited with any
thing but being the son of the "Wizard."

When the exhibition closed, the spotlight moved on, and Junior had
to find another sponsor who would pay him for the aura of fame attached

to his name. Fortuitously, investors appeared to form the Edison Jr.



214 / 

Steel and Iron Process Company, providing the younger Tom Edison
with one-third of the company's stock. Edison Sr. was outraged that his
ne'er-do-well son continued to exploit the Edison name and broke off
communication with him, letting his next-eldest son, Will, deliver the
news. Tom Jr. wrote his father in reply that he intended to "go on just as
I have been doing." He maintained that his family name had been a
"detriment" to his business career, as no bank believed Junior's claimed
need for credit. "If my name was Smith," he said, "I would be a rich
man today." He added a gratuitous insult about his father's bumbling in
business. "You should have been-'ask any body'-a millionaire ten
times over if you knew how to handle your own achievements."

The Edison Jr. Steel and Iron Process Company was followed by the
Thomas A. Edison, Jr. and William Holzer Steel and Iron Process Com

pany, which also failed. Junior was married, then swiftly not married,
to a woman whose profession (chorus girl) was mentioned in news
paper accounts as a compact summary of her character. Her former

husband's family viewed her as a gold-digging strumpet who had en
tered marriage with nothing but avarice in her heart. If the unflattering
characterization were true, it suggests her eyesight was poor-Junior
possessed no gold to be dug. His brother Will reported to the family
that Tom Jr. had had to leave town to escape thousands in debts and a

pursuing sheriff. "He is the laughing stock of business men," Will said.
Unemployed and estranged from his father, Tom Jr. was exactly the

person that the Edison Chemical Company was looking for. Yes, a court
order had forbidden the company from using the Edison name, but
what if, instead of relying on C. M. Edison to justify use of the name, it
could use that of Thomas Edison's own eldest born, who had been en
dowed at birth with a name that was now world renowned? Tom Jr.
was agreeable, believing that his own inventive talents would finally be
recognized. He had come up with a "Magno-Electric Vitalizer," a re
markable device that cured "Paralysis, Rheumatism, Locomotor Ataxia,
and Nervous Prostration," and all other maladies that Junior called the
"so-called 'incurable' complaints." The company added the Vitalizer to
its line of wares, including the "Wizard's Ink Tablets," and renamed



\2IS

itself the Thomas A. Edison, Jr., Chemical Company. Junior was pro
vided a vice president's position, a $5,000 initial payment, a monthly
stipend, and royalties.

Edison Sr. was upset beyond measure. He communicated his feelings
to Junior, and Junior's resolution to make his wayan his own crumbled.
In December 1902, he wrote his father with an offer to give up "all fu
ture rights to the name of Edison for the purpose of obtaining money,"
and left the monetary terms of the agreement to be set by Tom Sr. In the
father's retrospective account of the episode, reconciliation with his son
came about because it was he who offered his son "more money than

the men he was associated with would pay him."

Having paid for the cooperation of his son, the elder inventor then
filed a lawsuit against the company for use of the Edison name and for
the moniker "Wizard." A press account in a local newspaper described

it as "one of the most peculiar suits in the history of the court," as it fea
tured a dispute that centered around protecting the inventor's name by
restricting commercial use of the son's.

Edison's attorneys had a more difficult case to make against the
Thomas A. Edison, Jr., Chemical Company than they had had against
the Edison Chemical Company. They offered two arguments. First, cus
tomers were being misled to assume that Edison was the inventor of the
Wizard's Ink Tablets and the Magno-Electric Vitalizer. (The future
would bear this out: Years later, customers would still send to Edison's

laboratory their Vitalizers for recharging-and the lab would send
them right back, untouched, with a note explaining "we know nothing
whatever about them and have no way of charging them.") Second,
Tom Jr. could not legitimately claim to be an inventor. To bolster this
contention, Tom Sr. supplied an affidavit that said Junior had no regular
occupation, had never produced a single practical invention, and-this
must have hurt-was "incapable of making any invention or discovery
of merit."

Edison was more concerned about his name than about the commer

cial fate of any of his inventions, none of which had ever moved him to

say anything equivalent to what he told a reporter in 1904: "I'll protect



216 / 

my name if it costs me every dollar in the world I possess." Having ex
tracted his son from the Thomas A. Edison, Jr., Chemical Company, he
did not have to spend more of his own money, however, to end the com
pany's poaching of his good name. Contending that selling the Vitalizer
perpetrated a fraud upon the public, the U.S. Postal Service halted deliv
ery of all mail to the company, which had to close its doors.

This should have brought this public unpleasantness for the Edison
family to a close. But the usually taciturn Edison had much still to say,
including his thoughts about the shortcomings of his hapless son. He
told the New York American that Tom Junior was incapable of building
a Magno-Electric Vitalizer. Or anything else; he simply had no inventive
talent. "I could not get him to attend school because he wished to be

come famous and have it said that he, too, never had attended a col

lege." His son would struggle to support himself for the remainder of
his life, but the lack of a college education would turn out to be a lesser
problem than alcoholism and mental illness.

During the fight over use of the Edison surname, when Tom Jr. had
flung the charge that his father did not know how to convert technical
achievements into commercial success, his criticism had been spot on.

As time passed, his father subsequently did no better in the timing of his
launch of new business ventures. He followed the debacle of his ore

milling venture with a new obsession, electric cars. In 1900, and ahead
of Henry Ford, Edison articulated an ambition to make automobiles
"the poor man's vehicle." Edison's vision, however, centered upon using
improved batteries to make electrically powered vehicles superior to
gasoline-powered ones. Eking out greater range from batteries became
his new, all-consuming preoccupation. By 1901, he had a prototype
electric car that could reach seventy miles per hour, offering a ride Edi
son called "the sport of kings." By 1902, he claimed his car had a range
of eighty-five miles without recharging, and he expected to have a bat
tery on the market within months, just as soon as final road tests were

complete. He predicted, "It will be but a short time before demand for



\217

storage batteries will create one of the most enormous industries in

the land."

His battery was released, but its performance was less than he had
led everyone to expect. His experiments continued and improved bat
teries followed, but the electric car remained a novelty. This did not
cause him to alter his predictions for the car's future dominance, how
ever. Ten years after his first pronouncement, he was excited to see that

the sales of "family electric carriages" were increasing "very rapidly"
and predicted that their lower maintenance costs would lead to their
"probably" displacing gasoline-powered cars.

At the very moment Edison was rather too optimistic about the

prospects for the electric car, he was insufficiently appreciative of the
commercial potential of the music business. As always, it was technical
problems that interested him more than commercial ones, and it was the
challenges in the laboratory that kept him absorbed in batteries, to the
exclusion of other possible business opportunities. His personal interest
in working on the phonograph had waned, then returned, and then
waned again. The technical advances that would finally, three decades
after its invention, make it a commercial success were a reliable spring
motor and the manufacturing technology for making multiple duplicate
copies of a musical recording from a single master. Even before these
pieces were in place at the very end of the nineteenth century, and sales of
phonographs and recordings zigged skyward, Edison was puttering else
where in the laboratory, at work on his automobile batteries.

The public had no reason to doubt that Edison was giving anything
but his full attention to the phonograph. His imprimatur was critical to
its marketing, and retail distributors relied upon his celebrity. Prospec
tive customers were told that the Edison phonograph had received the
great man's "constant care," the only invention of his to receive this fa
vored attention. In at least one instance, a Des Moines, Iowa, retailer
went too far, appending a counterfeit "Thos A. Edison" signature to a
typewritten letter sent out in a mass mailing that requested that the re
cipient send in his or her impressions of the latest Edison phonograph.
"Will you drop me just a line-address it to me personally and mark it



21 B / 

care Edison Laboratory, Orange, N.J.?" When the letters came into the
laboratory, Edison's staff was so aghast that his name had been bor
rowed by one of his dealers that they held off mentioning the matter to
him. They also knew that the letters came with idiosyncratic requests
(one man, writing from Marcus, Iowa, was quite particular: He wrote
Edison that he wanted "a personal letter from you, not a type written
letter, but just a good plain written letter written with your own hand").
William Maxwell, the vice president for sales, wrote the Des Moines
dealer, "You can readily see that it will not do at all to have people writ
ing in here to Mr. Edison" and demanded an explanation of the dealer's
presumptuousness. The dealer replied, not very credibly, that he had
simply forgotten to get permission to use the facsimile of Edison's
signature.

Edison had retained the patent rights and business stakes in the
phonograph, so when the business came into its own, he approved the
construction of expanded manufacturing facilities adjacent to his labo
ratory to handle the orders that poured in. This was followed by still
more growth, and more building: An entire block adjacent to the labo
ratory was filled with five-story hulks. By 1907, as the company erected
its sixteenth building, Edison boasted of "the largest talking machine
factory in the world." All the buildings were built with concrete, which,
Edison proudly pointed out, was "absolutely fireproof."

Edison and his copywriters were inclined to say too much when ex

tolling the virtues of the Edison phonograph. A pithy rubric, like
"Made in America in 1888-Made Perfect in 1914," would be dwarfed

by long columns of text that brought out every subtle advantage to be
gained by the consumer who chose the Edison machine. The praise in
an advertisement that ran in the Detroit Times went on at such length
that Maxwell wondered if it was a bit much. "I wish I knew whether

people will read that much copy. Farmers will, we know-but do city
people? "

Once Edison's marketers squarely addressed the urban middle class,
they devised advertising that made prospective customers feel as enti
tled to enjoy the pleasures of recorded music as anyone. "When the



\219

King of England wants to see a show, they bring the show to the castle
and he hears it alone in his private theater." So said an advertisement in
1906 for the Edison phonograph. It continued: "If you are a king, why
don't you exercise your kingly privilege and have a show of your own in
your own house."

Other advertisements developed the theme of the phonograph as the
great leveler. In 1908, a man in formal wear and his slender wife stood
on one side of a table, upon which sat a phonograph; on the other side
stood four servants, wearing smiles and expressions of curiosity. The

caption said that the Edison phonograph had brought the same enter
tainment enjoyed by the rich within the range of all. The credit for mak
ing the phonograph "the great popular entertainer" was to be bestowed
upon Thomas Edison. "He made it desirable by making it good; he
made it popular by making it inexpensive." Another advertisement
promised that the phonograph would "amuse the most unresponsive,"
adding reverently, "It is irresistible because Edison made it."

In truth, the Edison phonograph fell short of being irresistible; nor
did it lead the industry in technical innovation. It was the Victor Talking
Machine Company that made discs a practical medium. The disc's flat
dimensions offered a more convenient means of storing many songs
than the three-dimensional Edison cylinder. It was Victor that came up
with a disc that offered four minutes of capacity when Edison's cylin
der's had only two minutes. And it was Victor that introduced the
pricey, and very successful, Victrola, which hid the horn of the phono
graph within a wood cabinet, transforming it into a piece of fine furni
ture-and a very profitable item for its manufacturer.

Edison's offerings may have lagged, but such was the demand for
kingly entertainment enjoyed at home that the Edison Phonograph
Works prospered along with Victor and Columbia, the two companies
that with Edison comprised the dominant three in the industry. Edison's
cylinder, which cost about seven cents to manufacture, sold for fifty
cents, providing a nice gross margin that covered all manner of strategic
missteps. One of those was Edison's conviction that there was no need to
switch to discs. When he finally gave in and brought out discs, he could



220 / 

not bring himself to relinquish cylinders, so resources had to be spread
across two incompatible formats. Nor would he permit his standards for
sound quality to be compromised. He insisted that his discs be twice the
thickness of those produced by the competition and much heavier, which
provided for better sound but made them far more cumbersome.

Edison was adamant that Edison recordings would be played only on
Edison phonographs. His competitors, Victor and Columbia, shared the
same playback technique, etching a laterally cut groove that sent the
needle moving horizontally as the record played. Their recordings could
be played on one another's machines. Edison, however, adopted his own
design, a groove that varied vertically, called at the time a "hill-and
dale" cut. An adapter permitted Victor records to be played on an Edi
son Disc Phonograph, but Edison forbade the sale of an attachment that
permitted his records to be played on the machines of the competition.

Edison had never shown a talent for strategy, and he did not give the

subject close study. He spent most of his time working on problems re
lated to industrial chemistry, principally, those related to batteries, and
secondarily, those related to mass production of cylinders and discs. Yet
he did take time to make decisions about music, personally approving
and, more often, disapproving-the suggestions of underlings about
which performers should be recorded. His dislike of various musical
genres and artists was strong and encompassed almost everything. Pop
ular music- "these miserable dance and ragtime selections" -had no
chance of receiving his blessing. Jazz was for "the nuts"; one perfor
mance reminded him of "the dying moan of dead animals." But he was
no elitist. He also dismissed the members of the Metropolitan Opera
House as lacking tune. Sergei Rachmaninoff was just "a pounder."

In 1911, Edison wrote a correspondent that he had had to take on
the responsibilities of musical director for his company because the in
cumbent had made what Edison deemed to be awful decisions, permit
ting players to play out of tune and, most egregiously, tolerating a
defective flute that "on high notes gives a piercing abnormal sound like
machinery that wants oiling." How these dissonant sounds had escaped
the notice of others is a question that Edison did not address.



\221

Edison approached music as if it were a cryptographic puzzle to be
solved; musical composition was merely a matter of formula, and in
most cases, in his judgment, was unoriginal (he did except Beethoven
from this criticism). His daughter Madeleine recalled in 1972 an occa
sion when she was a young girl, growing up in Glenmont, when her fa
ther was determined to personally select waltzes that would be recorded
by his company. He hired a pianist and had her play loudly no fewer
than six hundred. The experience was not enjoyed by Madeleine and
the other members of the family. She remembered, "We just about left
home that time. "

To Edison, the technical problems posed in recording sound by
purely mechanical means, prior to the development of the microphone,
were far more absorbing than business issues. He allocated his time ac
cordingly. He spent a year and a half overseeing research on how to
record and clearly reproduce the word "sugar" perfectly. Two more
months were needed to master "scissors." He wrote, "After that the

phonograph would record and reproduce anything." This was not
wholly true. Recording an orchestra with pre-electric acoustic technol
ogy presented insoluble problems. He did his best, ordering the con
struction of the world's largest brass recording horn, 128 feet long,
5 feet in diameter at the end that received sound, tapering down to Ys
of an inch at the other. Its construction required thirty thousand rivets
alone, each carefully smoothed on the interior surface. It was a marvel
of metalwork, but as an instrument for recording sound, it never
worked very well. (It did serve its country well, however, being sent off
for service in World War II in a scrap drive.)

Edison's partial loss of hearing prevented him from listening to music
in the same way as those with unimpaired hearing. A little item that ap
peared in a Schenectady, New York, newspaper in 1913 related the
story that Edison supposedly told a friend about how he usually lis
tened to recordings by placing one ear directly against the phonograph's
cabinet. But if he detected a sound too faint to hear in this fashion,
Edison said, "I bite my teeth in the wood good and hard and then I get
it good and strong." The story would be confirmed decades later in



222 / 

Madeleine's recollections of growing up. One day she came into the sit
ting room in which someone was playing the piano and a guest, Maria
Montessori, was in tears, watching Edison listen the only way that he
could, teeth biting the piano. "She thought it was pathetic," Madeleine
said, "I guess it was."

Edison, though, was undaunted by the limitations of his hearing,
which would make for an inspirational tale, were it not for the fact that
he was the self-appointed musical director of a profit-seeking record
business, whose artistic decisions directly affected the employees of the
Edison Phonograph Works. His judgments and whims met no obstruc
tion. One employee, A. E. Johnson, recalled the disillusionment that
followed his being hired. He said of Edison, "I found out that he could
make awful mistakes, and 1 also found it didn't pay to tell him about his
mistakes. Let him find them out himself, and if you did that cleverly you
were all right." Workers spread word daily about Edison's mood. "The
Old Man is feelin' fine today" was welcome news. But if the word was
"the Old Man's on the rampage," employees dove for cover, "as in a cy
clone cellar, until the tempest was over."

Not just his employees, but also the general public, angered Edison.
He was exasperated by a public that clamored, he said, "for louder and
still louder records." He believed that "anyone who really had a musi
cal ear wanted soft music." And it was those customers, the" lovers of

good music," who Edison in 1911 said would be "the only constant
and continuous buyers of records." This was wishful thinking. What
was plainly evident to everyone else was that the only constant in the
music business was inconstancy, the fickle nature of popular fads. The
half-life of a commercially successful song was brief. By the time Edi
son's factory shipped the first records three weeks after recording, the
flighty public had already moved on.

Even then, in the founding years of the recorded-music business, the
economics of the industry was based upon hits, the few songs that en
joyed an unpredictably large success and subsidized the losses incurred
by the other releases. On rare occasions, Edison grudgingly granted
this. Then he would concede that the popular music he disdained was in



\223

most demand, and he took what comfort he could in the thought that
the "trash" his company reluctantly released did help to sell phono
graphs and indirectly help him to provide "music of the class that is en
joyed by real lovers of music. "

This business was not so easily mastered, however, and the contempt
with which Edison regarded popular music did not help him under
stand his customers. They would purchase the records of particular per
formers whom they had heard of but shied away from the unknown
artists. Decades later, economists who studied the workings of the en
tertainment industry would identify the winner-take-all phenomenon
that benefited a handful of performers. The famous become more fa
mous, and the more famous, the richer. Everyone else faces starvation.
This was the case at the turn of the twentieth century, too.

The management of the Victor Talking Machine Company under
stood these basic market principles long before Edison absorbed them.
Shortly after the company's founding in 1901, Victor signed Enrico
Caruso to an exclusive contract, paying him a royalty that was rumored
to be 25 percent of the $2 retail price of a Caruso record. His estimated
annual earnings from royalties in 1912 was $90,000, at a time when
the second-most-popular singer only earned $25,000. The others whom
Victor signed were notables, too: Farrar, Schumann-Heink, Galli-Curci,
Ponselle, Tetrazzini, Melba, McCormack, Paderewski, Cortot, de
Pachmann, Heifetz, Elman, Kreisler, Zimbalist, Toscanini, Stokowski,
and Muck.

At the same time Victor was writing checks for the leading talents of
the day, Edison brought out his checkbook reluctantly and rarely. One
exception was when in 1910 he signed the woman who way back on a
wintry night in 1879 had visited his Menlo Park laboratory: Sarah
Bernhardt.

In the Edison Phonograph Monthly, the company's internal trade
organ, much was made of the difficulties that had had to be overcome in

order to land an artist such as Bernhardt. She had had to be persuaded to
discard her "professional aversion to exploiting her talent in this man
ner." The monetary terms supposedly were not an issue ("Bernhardt is



224 / 

an extremely rich woman"). The sticking point was her concern that
crude recording technology would leave posterity with a sound inferior
to her voice. According to the company's publicists, a demonstration of
the phonograph persuaded her that Edison would produce "perfect
Records." The company urged dealers to write their local newspapers
and reap free publicity: "No paper will refuse to publish the news, as
everything that the Immortal Bernhardt does is eagerly seized upon by
the press."

We do not know whether Bernhardt ruled out commercial considera

tions (she did endorsements for commercial products like a dentifrice
for a fee, but she did draw the line when P. T. Barnum offered her
$10,000 for the rights to display a medical curiosity: her amputated
leg). We do know that Edison hated the negotiations with recording
stars, which entailed monetary demands far in excess of what Edison

considered reasonable. He complained that despite their talk about
their love for their art, "it is money, and money only, that counts." Even
the large sums paid to the most famous failed to secure their loyalty. He
grumbled that artists would bolt "for a little more money offered by
companies whose strongest advertising point is a list of names." When
Edison read that Stravinsky had written "the tempo of America is
greater than the rest of the world. It moves at a wonderfully swift
pace," Edison added in the margin: "Yes, with a metronome of money."

Edison convinced himself-without consulting others, in typical
fashion-that he could simply opt out of competition for stars. He tried
a small-budget alternative, scouting undiscovered voices among local
choirs in Orange and Newark. He wrote a correspondent in 1911, "I
believe if you record Church Choir singers and Musical Club, Glee
Club, etc., singers, that we shall be able to discover a lot of talent just
suitable for the phonograph." He was pleased to have found locally
two tenors that "can beat any Opera tenor except Caruso." Over time,
Edison did add Anna Case, Sergei ("the Pounder") Rachmaninoff, and
a few others. But he permitted competitors to snatch up other talented
performers, like Louis Armstrong, Bessie Smith, Fanny Brice, and Al
Jolson. The first record to sell 1 million copies was Vernon Dalhart's



\225

hillbilly ditty, "The Prisoner's Song." Not surprisingly, it was a Victor
recording, not an Edison.

The fame of the performers whom Victor Talking Machine astutely
signed did more than bolster record sales; it also added great luster to
Victor's brand. "Victrola" soon replaced "phonograph" as the generic
term, a development that caused Edison considerable distress. His office
would receive letters from confused customers who assumed that Edi

son had introduced the Victrola. In 1912, the chairwoman of the Immi

grant Aid Department of the Council of Jewish Women wrote to ask
Edison to donate a Victrola for placement on Ellis Island. It would offer
a little cheer to the immigrant detainees awaiting processing-and in
some cases deportation. In the margin of the letter, Edison drew a line
near the reference to the Victrola and scribbled a note of irritation to his

secretary: "Here is another of the innumerable instances where the pub
lic misunderstands." He directed that the correspondent be referred to
the Victor Company.

Edison dealers grumbled among themselves, too. The Topeka agency,
for example, complained in early 1915 to the one in Des Moines, "We
have no artists of any note on the Edison." It fell to Edison's salespeople
to explain their absence on the Edison label. A sales manual from this
time laid out the company's defense, which directed the public's atten
tion to "the great Wizard" who personally tested voice samples using
techniques of his own devising and selected "those voices which are
most worthy of Re-Creation by his new art." Only the voice, not the
reputation, mattered to the Wizard.

So determined was Edison to strip artists of their vanity and unrea
sonable demands that he refused to print the name of the recording
artist on the record label. When one of his dealers, the Santa Fe Watch

Company, of Topeka, Kansas, asked him to reconsider, Edison let loose
a torrent of pent-up opinion:

I am sure you will give me the credit of having put a tremendous
amount of thought into the Phonograph Business after the
many years that I have been engaged on it. Not alone to the



226 / 

technical side of the business have I given an immense amount
of thought but also to the commercial side, and I want to say to
you that I have most excellent reasons for not printing the name
of the Artist on the Record. Your business has probably not
brought you into intimate contact with musicians, but mine has.
There is a great deal of "faking" and Press Agent work in the
musical profession, and I feel that for the present at least I
would rather quit the business than be a party to the boasting
up of undeserved reputations.

Edison wrote this in 1913, when he was sixty-six years old. His confi
dence in his business acumen had, if anything, grown over time. And in
taking this stand, he reveals a nature that could not see the inconsis
tency: Here his own companies used his fame as the Wizard to market
his inventions, prominently displaying his name and driving off anyone
who threatened to infringe the trademark. But he could not abide oth
ers-in this case, his own recording artists-using fame, even though
much more modest, for their own commercial interests.

Victor was especially receptive to the fads of popular music. The
company immediately responded to a dance craze around 1910, in
which taxi dance halls opened, school proms multiplied, and lodge
cotillions drew avid attendees. Victor signed the ballroom dance stars
Vernon and Irene Castle to oversee all of the company's dance record

ings. Columbia Records issued and promoted dance records, too.
Edison, however, stood aloof. He continued to follow the marketing

plan with which he had begun, which was to make his phonograph the
centerpiece of a home entertainment center, eliminating the need to go
out in search of fun. Without mention of "cocooning," the Edison mar
keters in the early twentieth century tapped a preference for private
consumption of entertainment, a preference that is only now, a century
later, finding full expression in the installation of high-definition tele
vision sets and multichannel sound systems. One aspect of Edison's ad

vertising campaign that does not have a contemporary ring is its

depiction of married life: "When a man leaves home in the evening it is



\227

because he seeks amusement. The best way to keep him home is to give
him the amusement there. Make home a competitor of downtown, the
club, the cafe, the theatre and the concert hall. No such thing will fur
nish so much amusement for so many people, so many times, and in so
many ways as the Edison phonograph."

The voice that is speaking is smooth and omniscient, wise in all do
mestic matters. It is not Thomas Edison's real-life voice, however, that
had the burr of irritation when swatting away the complaints of his
dealers. If one complained about the poor quality of the finish on the
phonograph cabinets, Edison twisted the complaint into something
else, a wish to have a $150 cabinet provided for a $100 machine. If he
complied, "I would have to go out of business," he condescendingly ex
plained to one dealer. As for his reasons why he did not affix the price
on the face of the record, he wrote that he did not have time for

"lengthy explanations," but there was a good technical reason that
should have been taken on faith. The Wizard could not understand why
his dealers refused to acknowledge his competence to make such simple
decisions: "I should be credited in cases like this with as much intelli

gence as the general average of the genus homo."
His voice was more often than not tinged with irritation about the

exasperating tastes of the public, too. A typical letter that he dictated in
1914 went on at some length about the regional variations in musical
taste and the difficulties this created for his company. He did not display
any interest in the New Englanders' objections to "ragtime and Coon
Songs"; it was just one of many mysteries about likes and dislikes, con

veyed to him in sarcastic letters. He claimed to be so discouraged by the
hostility that these correspondents expressed that had he known about
the differences of opinion, he never would have entered the music
business.

Edison invested so much time personally managing every aspect of his
music business that it is easy to forget that in this same time period he
was principally concerned with work on automobile batteries. Music



228 / 

was merely a sideline. He launched other projects, too, such as promot
ing the sale to the working class of all-concrete houses, designed by Edi
son (but not adopted as a replacement for his own house at Glenmont).
The project that was most ahead of its time was the home movie projec
tor, named the Home Projecting Kinetoscope, that he introduced in late
1911. It was both an engineering marvel and a commercial flop. The
film's frames were tiny: three-sixteenths of an inch high and a quarter of
an inch wide. When the image was projected upon a six-foot-tall screen,
each was enlarged about 120,000 times. In order to keep the dimen
sions of the unit small and its weight to twenty pounds, Edison and his
assistants designed the projector to accommodate filmstrips that were
only eighty feet long, but it was effectively triple this length because the
film was composed of three narrow ministrips, mounted side by side.
The film would be run through once, showing the images on one edge,
then the film-transport mechanism would be shifted so that the images
in the middle, which ran in the opposite direction, would be visible, and
then the home projectionist would adjust the projector one more time
to project the third row. This arrangement yielded a show that ran six
teen minutes.

Along with the home projector, the company introduced a central
clearinghouse for used films, which offered customers a way of replen
ishing the family's entertainment supply by using the postal service to
swap titles with others for a nominal processing fee. Edison, however,
wanted to use his projector not for entertainment but for education. For

preschoolers, his idea was nothing less than brilliant. For teaching the
alphabet, Edison explained in an interview, "suppose, instead of the
dull, solemn letters on a board or a card you have a little play going on
that the littlest youngster can understand," with actors carrying in let
ters, hopping, skipping, turning somersaults. "Nothing like action
drama-a play that fascinates the eye to keep the attention keyed up."
(A prospectus for Sesame Street could not have made a better case.)

And it wasn't just the youngest students who would benefit by adop
tion of the new medium; Edison was convinced all students would. He

compiled a list of subjects suitable for his new pedagogical tool-the



\229

total came to four thousand, and he vowed in 1912 to "make films of
them all." His marketing pitch to school systems was simple: He would
rent a set of educational films to a school for $8 a week. "You couldn't
hire much of a teacher for $8 a week, could you?" he chortled. "And
then think of the saving-you won't need any truant officer. No, siree!

Every little toddler in the district will just want to scoot to school!"
A year after the release of his home projector, Edison offered only

twenty-five feature titles, including the scintillating Manufacture of
Paper, Apple Pies, and Modern Weapons for Fighting Fire. It was not a
catalog large enough to draw significant numbers of customers, nor was
it sufficient to keep the clearinghouse well supplied. In 1913, two years
after the debut of the projector, all owners received a letter from the

company imploring them to send in any" idle films" for exchanges. The
venture languished.

No critic at the time apparently commented on the outlandishness of
Edison's carelessly announced ambition to radically remake American
education-and in his spare time. The side projects multiplied, each ini
tial announcement bringing reporters running and forcing Edison to di
lute his attention.

When he plunged into a campaign, no subordinate would have any
grounds to tease him for working less hard than anyone else. When a
business colleague in 1912 wrote him and casually asked how he was
feeling, Edison replied, "Well, I worked 122 hours in six days last week,
hence I must feel fine-and do." The next month, he had a time clock
installed in the laboratory, which permitted him to document his hours
and call in reporters to let the world know that he outworked everyone.
The first week the clock was in operation, Edison logged ninety-five
hours and forty-nine minutes, or, as one story put it, "nearly twice as
long as any of his 5,000 employees who enjoyed an eight hour day." His
recorded hours would have been longer had he been able to log in prop
erly on the first day, as he had been working all night and left the build
ing at 8:15 A.M.

Five years earlier, on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, Edison had
told reporters that he was retiring from business and would spend all of



230 / 

his time in the laboratory, pursuing pure research. His self-exile from
business matters ended, however, almost as soon as it had been an
nounced. He felt compelled to personally oversee-and personally de
cide-everything, as he was wont to do. He drove himself hard, as hard
in his sixties, seventies, and even eighties, as he had ever worked as a
younger man, because he felt a burden that was uniquely his to shoul
der: protecting the public image of "Thomas Edison," omnipresent and
omniscient, the Wizard with a magical touch ("It is irresistible because
Edison made it"). Protecting the brand required the deployment of
lawyers to warn off anyone who attempted to trade on the Edison
name. Brand protection also required that Edison remain personally in
volved in everything, trying to live up to the legend. He did not regard
this as a burden. On the contrary, it was the very thing that gave his life
meaning. As long as he was the one who made the decisions, he was
happy, no matter what consequences followed for his businesses.

Edison had the ability to remain imperturbably content even when di
saster struck. In the early evening of 7 December 1914, an explosion
rocked his film-finishing building, part of the complex of buildings sur
rounding his laboratory. The building was swiftly evacuated, just ahead
of the fire that swept the two-story structure. As the film stock fed the

flames, the fire jumped to the surrounding buildings, where it was fed
by the rubber and chemicals used in record manufacturing. These build
ings were made of reinforced concrete, the material that Edison had
boasted was completely fireproof. Their combustible contents, how
ever, fed conflagrations whose temperatures melted the floors, and soon
the walls collapsed. Even the newest building, less than two years old,
and said to be state of the art in fireproof construction, succumbed
when its contents-phonograph records-caught fire. Liquid chemicals
poured down the sides of the building as streams of flame. The high
temperatures rendered the efforts of the firefighters, who had been sum
moned from six neighboring communities, largely ineffectual. Ten to
fifteen thousand people gathered to watch.



\231

The fire had broken out at the dinner hour, when Edison happened to
be at home. He was one of the first to get to the scene. Neither he nor

his assistants thought that the fire would spread to the neighboring con
crete buildings, and no one initially took action to save what they
could. When Mina arrived, she rushed in and out of the company's gen
eral offices, carrying papers out of harm's way while Edison stood by
and watched the firefighters. Her rescue efforts ended only when the
flames reached that building, too. For seven hours, the firefighters did
their best in the bitterly cold night, but the fires claimed ten of the eigh
teen buildings of the complex. Miraculously, the disaster claimed only
one victim, William Troeber, an employee who had rushed back into a
building with a fire extinguisher under his arm, believing, erroneously it
turned out, that some of his coworkers were still inside.

The facilities for phonograph and record manufacturing were lost.
The estimated damage was $3 million to $5 million, of which, the com
pany told reporters, insurance covered about $3 million. This latter
number appears to have been dispensed in order to give employees, job
bers, dealers, and customers reassurance that the Edison works would
have no difficulty recovering. A private letter, however, suggests that the
insurance coverage was minimal, as Edison had been supremely confi
dent when he began to build concrete buildings that coverage for fire
damage was superfluous.

Once the embers were cool and company managers could take stock,
they discovered that in some ways the fire had been considerate, skip
ping over two thousand gallons of high-proof alcohol that came through
undamaged. They also discovered that all of the master molds of the
company's recordings were undamaged-and they would receive a kind
offer of the loan of record presses from Victor. But on the night of the
fire, when none of this was known, when the fire had yet to be con
tained and was still hopping from one building to the next and when
the prospects were the bleakest, Edison's equanimity was put to a test.
His immediate reaction? He cracked jokes, laughed, and declared, "Al
though I am over 67 years old, I'll start all over again tomorrow."
Nothing could rattle him.



232 / 

The striking absence of visible discouragement on Edison's part in
spired a New York Times editorial titled"Abnormality Like His a Bless
ing." The Times ascribed Edison's "abnormality" to his temperament, a
new concept that was explained as being beyond the control of an indi
vidual's will. (At that time, temperament was said to be controlled by
the thyroid and pituitary glands.) Some "abnormality" should have
been expected, however, from the abnormal experience of playing for
thirty years the role of the celebrated Wizard. His fame had been built
on his work, then reinforced by his eagerness to be the hardest-working
man in the invention business. Edison reacted to the disaster as if it

were a tonic: "It's like the old days to have something real to buck up
against.

"

"I never intend to retire," Edison said in an interview in 1911.
"Work made the earth a paradise for me." Not merely made, past tense,
but continued to make for him a paradise. He voiced heresy when he
said that he did not believe that a paradise awaited in the afterlife. He
was speaking, however, as a man who experienced paradisiacal plea
sure every moment he was at work. No wonder he could not imagine
doing anything else.



CHAPTER ELEVEN



IN
1896, WHEN Thomas Edison first met Henry Ford, Edison was

famous, and Ford was not. If Edison failed to remember the en
counter afterward, the likely reason is not self-absorption but lop-

sided arithmetic: one luminary, many strangers clamoring to meet him.
The occasion was a convention of the Association of Edison Illuminat

ing Companies held at a beach hotel near Coney Island. Edison was at

tending in an honorific role, having sold off his electric light interests
and thrown himself into his mining venture. It was not his customary
practice to spend time outside of his own workplace, but for three days
he settled into the role of passive conventioneer.

At dinner on the first day, Edison found himself seated at a large oval
table with senior representatives of various large electric utilities. The
conversation centered on the bright prospects for the industry, poised to
supply the power for electric cars that would replace horses. In the midst
of these happy speculations, the superintendent of the Edison Illuminating
Company in Detroit, Alexander Dow, spoke up to mention a curiosity.
Dow's chief engineer, thirty-three-year-old Henry Ford, whom he had
brought along with him, was an amateur inventor who had just built
a cart that was powered not by electricity but by a gasoline-powered
engine. It was equipped with four bicycle wheels; Ford called it a
Quadricycle.

Asked to explain how his carriage was powered, Ford addressed
everyone at the table and Edison cupped his ear, trying to catch Ford's

233



234 / 

words. A man seated by Edison offered to change places with Ford so
that Edison could hear better. Once the switch was effected, Edison

peppered Ford with questions; Ford sketched out his answers. Then
came the moment that Ford would say changed his life: "Young man,
that's the thing!" Edison told him, pounding the table for emphasis.
"Electric cars must keep near to power stations. The storage battery is
too heavy. Steam cars won't do either, for they have a boiler and fire.
Your car is self-contained-carries its own power plant-no fire, no
boiler, no smoke, and no steam. You have the thing. Keep at it." With
encouragement from the man whom Ford regarded as "the greatest in
ventive genius in the world" ringing in his ears, Ford returned home
with the conviction that he should persevere. He told his wife, "You are
not going to see much of me until I am through with this car. "

We have only Ford's account of the meeting, and the purported de
tails were set down on paper for the first time no fewer than thirty years
later. The stagy dialogue rings false; nor did Ford immediately quit his
day job at Edison Illuminating. It would take three more years before he
felt ready to try to commercialize his automobile designs as a full-time
entrepreneur. But he did meet Edison at the convention and did have a

conversation that must have roughly resembled what he later recol
lected. The two had a second conversation, too: Ford recalled that Edi
son invited him to ride with him on the train back to New York City at
the conclusion of the convention. Edison did not resume their conversa

tion about the internal combustion engine but instead spoke of other
topics, including his boyhood memories of Michigan.

There is no question that Henry Ford felt much encouraged. He
would later regard Edison with worshipful regard and spend stupen
dous sums to honor the inventor. Whether Edison dispensed as large a
dollop of encouragement as Ford perceived is open to doubt, however.
Edison was reliably polite in such situations, but he virtually never
praised the technical feats of others. Edison's subsequent actions sug
gest that he forgot the encounter; if he remembered it at all, he chose to
pretend he did not. The second encounter came eleven years later, in
1907, when Ford, now the head of his own eponymous company, wrote



\235

Edison with a mixture of familiarity and worshipfulness: "My Dear Mr.
Edison," it began. "I am fitting up a den for my own private use at the
factory and 1 thought 1 would like to have photographs of about three
of the greatest inventors of this age to feast my eyes on in idle moments.

Needless to say Mr. Edison is the first of the three and 1 would esteem it

a great personal favor if you would send me a photograph of yourself."
Ford apparently believed that the life-changing impression left upon

him by Edison eleven years earlier had been equally memorable to Edi
son. He may also have felt a comfortable familiarity because he had re
cently been contacted by Edison's son William, now twenty-nine years
old, who was attempting to sell Ford Motor Company spark plugs of
his own design (Will, who had briefly attended Yale's Sheffield Scientific
School and was determined to succeed on his own, had not kept his fa
ther informed about his activities).

If Edison remembered the earlier encounter with Ford, his response
to Ford's simple request for a photograph seems strange: Edison in
structed his secretary not to respond. This was likely prompted by a
spasm of competitiveness: Ford was one of many internal-combustion

engine-equipped car manufacturers that competed with the electric car
equipped with Edison's newly developed alkaline battery. Or Edison's
rebuff may have been the reaction of a famous person irritated by the
presumptuous familiarity of an utter stranger whom he had no memory
of ever meeting.

The episode is of interest because it occurred when Henry Ford was
not yet a household name and was merely one of more than a hundred
automobile manufacturers. The next year, he introduced the Model T,
his fame swiftly reached the ethereal altitude of Edison's, and his busi
ness success far exceeded that of the older man's. This change in relative
status made possible a friendship, not because Edison sought the com
pany of the famous and successful-he did not seek the company of

anyone-but because it removed the basis of Edison's fear that a busi
ness acquaintance sought to move close for ulterior reasons. As for
celebrity, the two men now shared personal knowledge of the tribula
tions that came with fame.



236 / 

Such was Edison's inherently solitary nature, however, that he would
not likely have been willing to meet Ford in person again had it not been
for the behind-the-scenes arrangements of William Bee, the sales man

ager at the Edison Storage Battery Company. In April 1911, Bee per
suaded Edison to make amends for ignoring Ford's earlier request for a

photograph and prepare one inscribed with a carefully measured com
pliment: "To Henry Ford. One of a group of men who have helped to
make U.S.A. the most progressive nation in the World." Bee sent it off
to Ford with a cover letter claiming that "Mr. Edison was only too
glad to send you his photograph." At the same time, Bee sent through an
intermediary a note inviting Ford to visit Edison at his laboratory. Ford
accepted. That was the easy part for Bee. Persuading Edison to make
himself available for Ford's visit required months of unsuccessful efforts.
Finally, after Bee had arranged for Ford to pay his visit in January 1912,
Edison reluctantly acquiesced: "Guess I will be here on the 9th."

Ford arrived in Orange eager to make a pitch to his hero: Would Edi
son be willing to design an electrical system-battery, generator, and
starter-for the Model T? The car in its current incarnation had none.

It was started with a hand crank, which was at best inconvenient to use,
and when it kicked back, dangerous. Edison did not accept Ford's offer
immediately but was sufficiently intrigued to mull the proposition over
and return with a counterproposal later in 1912. Would Ford be inter
ested in financing the development work on Edison's battery? His note
to "Friend Ford" explained that he had self-financed his battery experi
ments with profits from other lines of business but these funds limited
what he could do. Alternatively, "I could go to Wall St. and get more,
but my experience over there is as sad as Chopin's Funeral March. I
keep away. "

No major business figure detested Wall Street as much as Thomas
Edison-except Henry Ford. The two men had this in common. "Wall
Street" was less a geographic place than a shorthand for grasping Jews.
The two men had lots of things to say about Jews, Ford doing so pub
licly and Edison, privately. If Jews "are as wise as they claim to be,"
Ford wrote in his autobiography, "they will labor to make Jews Ameri-



\237

can, instead of labouring to make America Jewish." Edison sent Ford
clippings to add to his file on "The Jewish Question." "Please read
this-it's very funny," Edison added as an annotation to the text of a
speech delivered to a convention of the National Builder's Supply Asso
ciation that he sent Ford. Edison helpfully highlighted with pencil the
two paragraphs at the beginning, which were the speaker's opening
jokes. As a self-identified Irishman, the speaker, one Herbert N. Casson,
claimed to speak for all Irish, lamenting their willingness to fight some
one else's war and then lose whatever it was they were supposed to have
gained. "I have generally found that after the fight some Jew has got
what we started out to get." The audience's laughter was transcribed
along with the punch line.

The men's anti-Semitism shaped their business plans. Henry Ford
would not permit "Wall Street" to get hold of his revered Edison. He

stepped forward to offer Edison forgivable loans, at 5 percent annual
interest, to finance the development work on the battery. The loans
were secured by future royalties that Edison's laboratory would earn
from batteries; Ford said Edison could expect sales to Ford Motor of
$4 million a year. The package on offer had everything Edison could
ever want: It paid homage to his expertise in electrical systems; it gave a
new direction for his battery work, in case the electric car did not suc
ceed commercially; and it provided complete autonomy, free of obliga
tion to report to Wall Street financiers about his spending. Once staff
members for Ford and Edison worked out legal and financial details,
Edison signed off on the agreement in November 1912. The next
month, the first slice of $150,000 arrived; the following March, another
$100,000; and by the end of the year, Edison had borrowed a total of
$700,000. More payments from Ford followed.

Edison did not abandon his previous ambitions to make a success of
an electric car; he simply made Henry Ford his new partner. In January
1914, Ford announced that he planned within the year to begin manu
facturing an electric car using a lightweight battery that Edison had been
preparing for some time. Ford told reporters, "I think Mr. Edison is the
greatest man in the world and I guess everyone does." Ford, who had



238 / 

also just announced the adoption of the "Five-Dollar Day," effectively
doubling the wages of virtually all of his workers, was at this historical
moment the single most influential businessperson in the country. The
New York newspapers, however, had not realized it. When they reported
on the plans for the Ford-Edison electric car, they mostly paid compli
ments to Edison. Ford was portrayed as the party in the transaction who
was most in need ("Henry Ford Seeks Mr. Edison's Aid.").

Edison was not averse to the flattery, but more important, he re
sponded to the opportunity to have a relationship with an equal, an
other technically inclined person who had been pushed into the strange
land of the extremely famous. The two men brought their families to
gether, too, intertwining personal and business ties. The Edisons visited
the Fords at their home in Dearborn, Michigan; the Fords came down
to Fort Myers, Florida, to share a winter vacation, discuss their mutual
interest in gardening, and "motor" together in the Everglades area. Edi
son did not realize that the combination of the two families would in

crease a celebrity index exponentially greater than his alone, drawing
reporters and curiosity seekers and unwanted attention to his remote
winter hideaway. On the evening that the Fords arrived, two thousand
townspeople came out to welcome them and ogle. Seeing reporters
present, Edison is said to have complained, "There is only one Fort
Myers, and now ninety million people are going to find out."

It was fitting that Fort Myers would playa role in the broadening per
sonal relationship between Edison and Ford. The last time that Edison
had let down his natural guard and spent vacation time with a business
colleague as he did with Ford was when he and Ezra Gilliland had
bought twin plots in Fort Myers thirty years earlier. Gilliland had intro
duced Edison to his future wife, but the two men were not equals in the
shared realm of the phonograph business. When Edison thought that
Gilliland had taken pecuniary advantage of him, the relationship had
ended acrimoniously. Since then, Edison had deliberately kept acquain
tances from coming closer. "Mr. Edison has few friends," Mina once ob
served. "Because of his work he has had to live a great deal by himself
and in himself-shut out from the social contacts open to most men."



\239

Now, in the company of Ford, someone much wealthier than he, Edi
son did not need to worry about behind-the-scenes machinations. He

relaxed. Ford became his neighbor-just like Gilliland, though un
doubtedly unaware of the earlier history-when Ford bought a plot of
land for his winter vacation home adjoining Edison's.

Except for vacations, the two men did not have many opportunities
to spend time in person with each other, and they did not, as a rule,
correspond with each other. If they needed to communicate, they relied
upon their secretaries to relay messages. One exception, and a revealing
one, is a letter that Ford wrote Edison in March 1914, after returning
home following his first visit to Fort Myers. He maintained a formal
tone when addressing Edison, sixteen years his senior-"My dear Mr.
Edison," he began. He and his wife wished to thank him for the enjoy
able vacation they had had with the Edisons. No, that did not capture
his feelings; this vacation was "in fact the most enjoyable one we have
ever had." With the thank-you out of the way, he added a little bit of
small talk, one manufacturer addressing another.

Then Ford arrived at the primary reason for writing: to make a re

quest. During the recent vacation, the two men happened to talk about
the harmful effects of cigarette smoking. Ford recalled Edison's remark
that the damage it caused was incurable. Would Edison be kind enough
to write a letter that explained the nature of the harm and why it was ir
reversible? With Edison's permission, Ford planned to use the letter in
his antismoking campaign among workers. In asking Edison to serve as
a quotable authority on the subject, Ford reveals his understanding of
how celebrity-his, Edison's, anybody's-confers, in the eyes of the
not-famous, expertise on all manner of subjects. Edison could speak
about the deleterious effects of smoking not because of a background in
respiratory disease or epidemiology, but because he was Edison. If
Ford's fame alone could not persuade his employees to quit smoking,
perhaps the combination with Edison's would be persuasive.

Edison sent off the requested letter in his best handwriting. He did
not pause to first have it proofread, so Ford had his secretary, Ernest
Liebold, write Edison's underling, William Bee, about the delicate matter



240 / 

of two misspelled words. "I know Mr. Edison would prefer to have it
correct if given publicity," Liebold wrote, sending along a sheet that Edi
son could use to recopy the letter. Edison complied without complaint.

The injurious agent in Cigarettes comes principally from the
burning paper wrapper. The substance thereby formed is called
"Acrolein." It has a violent action on the nerve centers, produc
ing degeneration of the cells of the brain, which is quite rapid
among boys. Unlike most narcotics this degeneration is perma
nent and uncontrollable. I employ no person who smokes ciga
rettes. Yours, Thomas A. Edison

Edison had not, in fact, excluded smokers from his employee rolls.
After the letter had been drafted, he hurriedly had signs posted at his
plants: "Cigarettes Not Tolerated. They Dull The Brain."

If Ford anticipated the fircstorm of criticism from the tobacco inter
ests that would surely follow, he did not warn Edison, who appears to
have been completely unprepared. Edison was accustomed to having
his own tobacco habits treated by the press as a subject of amusement,
such as when he was vacationing in Florida and sent word to the labo

ratory in New Jersey that he needed a replenished supply of chewing to
bacco from one of his employees, Red Kelly in Building 18, who
"knows a good chew," to be sent "in a hurry." He did not have to an
swer questions from the press about his fondness of cigars. Reporters
had listened respectfully when he criticized only one form of tobacco
consumption, cigarette smoking, which happened to be the one form
that he disliked. He explained, with the tone of a world-renowned ex
pert addressing a lay audience, that poisonous cigarette papers dulled
the mind, and that is why Mexicans, whom he had heard were heavy
smokers, "as a race are not clear headed. "

Then, with the arrival of the controversy when Ford published Edi
son's letter, the same press turned on Edison, treating his disquisitions
about cigarettes derisively. A New York Times editorial, "An Inventor
out of His Field," wondered aloud about his lack of scientific authority



\241

on this subject. If, as Edison claimed, cigarettes dulled the mind, so, too,
did a good dinner and a good sleep. Edison's own habits were exam
ined. Should not Edison consider the effects on the mind of "irregular
meals and excessive hours of continuous work"?

Percival Hill, president of the American Tobacco Company, led his
industry's counterattack with a devastatingly polite response to Edi
son's letter. Hill publicly dared Edison to repeat his charges while nam
ing in particular any of the brands of American Tobacco. Should he do
so, Hill promised to initiate legal proceedings to obtain damages. What
ever sums Hill recovered, he would donate to charity. Edison elected
not to accept the challenge.

Following Hill, James Zobian, the advertising representative of
Philip Morris & Company, published in the New York newspapers full
page open letters addressed to Edison that were reprinted and quoted at
length elsewhere. Zobian had sent cigarette papers used by Philip Mor
ris to an independent laboratory and now brandished the certificates at
testing to the lack of "any poisonous ingredients therein." Granting
that Edison had acquired his "prominence and fame" in an honest and
deserving way, Zobian said, "When it comes to analytical chemistry, I
believe Mr. Edison himself will admit that supremacy in that branch of

science belongs to others!"
The last time Edison had been the subject of widespread criticism had

been three years earlier, when he had casually announced that he
planned to offer furniture made of concrete, providing a full line to
complement the concrete cabinet for his phonograph that he had al
ready made. Claiming that the surface could be stained to resemble any
kind of wood desired, he said his concrete furniture would "make it

possible for the laboring man to put furniture in his home more artistic
and more durable than is now to be found in the most palatial resi
dences in Paris."

At least the hoots that followed were brought upon Edison entirely
by his own misconceived plans. Some commentators were not even cer
tain that Edison was serious (he was). Cartoonists had no difficulty ex
tracting humor from Edison's announcement (sample: Edison tells two



242 / 

moving men straining under a concrete sofa, "Don't be afraid of hurt

ing it, boys, but look out for your feet").
The cartoons and jokes soon passed, and the controversy came and

went without challenging Edison's authority as a technical expert. The
cigarette flap, however, was hurtful because his technical expertise was
directly questioned-his critics paid no attention to his claims that his
extensive research on paper filaments for the lightbulb had acquainted
him with the poisonous substances in cigarettes. And the criticism was
harder to bear because the controversy had been incited by someone
else, and Edison had been pulled in without anticipating what would
follow. He would never repeat the mistake of publicly following Ford
into new campaigns and controversy.

Once past the cigarettes episode, Edison derived nothing but benefits
from his association with Henry Ford. Edison and his family members
were the recipients of gifts personally selected by Ford. Some were ex
pensive: Tom and Mina Edison received so many Ford cars that it is not

possible to tally exactly how many. Other gifts showed great expendi
ture of that most scarce resource, Ford's attention. Edison would re

ceive from him a birthday telegram; Mina, a birdhouse. The adult
children were not neglected, either. In 1914, thirty-eight-year-old Tom
Edison Jr., now living on a farm his father had bought for him in
Burlington, New Jersey, and tinkering with carburetors, received from
Henry Ford a Model T engine that he had requested for experimenting,
followed by a new car. Twenty-four-year-old Charles Edison received
one of Ford's prized rifles in a custom-built case. When Theodore Edi
son, the youngest of Edison's six children, turned sixteen in 1914, he
found a new car waiting for him, sent by Ford.

On one occasion, in 1916, when Ford heard from his dealer in Fort

Myers that Edison had just paid for a new Ford touring car to be read
ied for delivery the next day, Ford had the dealer present the car to Edi
son with Ford's compliments and a refund of the purchase price. (The
dealer turned out to be quite vexed when he learned afterward that no
one in Henry Ford's office had given thought to the commission he lost



\243

because of the gift; much correspondence went back and forth between
Michigan and Florida about this single transaction.)

The gifts flowed almost totally in one direction, from Ford's family to
Edison's. It was not in Edison's nature to come up with gift ideas, but he
was responsive if a suggestion was placed in front of him. When Ford first
visited Fort Myers, he noticed a steam engine on the property that Edison
had decommissioned upon the arrival of a gas engine. When he returned
to Michigan, he wrote Edison explaining that it had sentimental value
to him. Could he purchase it for the price Edison had paid for his new
engine? Edison instructed his secretary to ship it to Ford as a present.

It was business that engaged Edison more than personal matters, and
he found a number of Edison products to sell to Ford Motor Company
that had nothing to do with automotive electrical systems. Movies made
with Edison equipment were to be used to train new hands on the Ford

assembly line, at least according to Henry Ford in January 1914, speak
ing without having tried using the medium for this purpose. Edison dic
tating machines were installed in Ford shops and were utterly useless
(they lacked sufficient volume to be audible). Cement made by the Edi
son Portland Cement Company would be the sale source in all construc
tion at Ford Motor Company. Ford Motor's chief architect could not
believe initially that Henry Ford would have agreed to an exclusive
arrangement with a single supplier and had to be sternly instructed by
Ford's personal secretary to follow Ford's wishes in the matter.

The evidence suggests that Henry Ford made all of these accommo
dations gladly. He was not doing business with Edison so much as he
was indulging his idol, and there was no limit to Ford's generosity. In
December 1914, when Edison's works were devastated by fire, Ford
happened to be in New York and could rush over that night to offer
comfort. Another $100,000 loan arrived the next week. Ford's willing
ness to assist Edison in whatever way he could was put to the most se

vere test two months after the fire when Edison was finalizing plans for
the layout of his rebuilt factory and wanted to use the services of one of
Ford's"Efficiency Engineers." Edison was not asking for a gift and kept



244 / 

the matter on a purely business footing. He wrote Ernest Liebold to ask
if "Mr. Ford could loan me one of his Efficiency Engineers for a little
while, and if so, what would be the cost per week." This simple request
turned out to be more complicated than it first appeared.

It turned out that there was no such thing as a free-floating "Effi
ciency Engineer" at Ford Motor. Every department had specialists who
knew only their one corner of operations. Ford did not know of anyone
who would fit the description of the engineer Edison wanted. In a sit
uation such as this, when complications arose, the titans used their
minions to do the communicating. Ford's secretary wrote Edison's, ex

plaining that it was Mr. Ford's suggestion to have two or three of Edi
son's best hands come to Detroit to look over the factory and learn
directly from the various department managers who had contributed to
the Ford plant's efficiency.

Edison would have none of this. Speaking through his secretary, who
again addressed Ford's, he said he could not spare anyone at his end and
reiterated his request: just send me one person for one week. Ford re

layed that he was "at a loss to know who he should send." He did have
one more suggestion, which was unintentionally comical: Edison
should send one person to Detroit who would select the one person at

Ford who would go to West Orange to assist. Never mind, Edison

telegraphed back. He would "not need your efficiency men as I have got
all information wanted from eight articles on Ford factory published in
engineering magazine.

"

In October 1915, Edison and his wife were invited officially by the city
of San Francisco to be present for the celebration of "Edison Day,"
which would coincide with the city's hosting of a world's fair, the
Panama-Pacific International Exposition. He decided he could not go
on a three-week-long trip and had his secretary write a lengthy letter ex
plaining that his personal attention was needed at his factories. If the
work was not completed, "a great many employees connected with the
various industries would be thrown out of work. "



\245

The next week, however, Edison changed his mind and decided to go
to San Francisco after all and ignore the specter of shuttered factories at
home. He may have been persuaded to make the trip because of a per
sonal appeal by Henry Ford. In any case, the Edisons and the Fords
made plans together. When they arrived in San Francisco, press cover
age was exhaustive. The conjunction of Edison and Ford, reclusive fig
ures who had assumed larger-than-life dimensions, brought attention to
their every move and casual utterance. The two men spent one day
walking around the exposition together without their wives, though
they were accompanied by a police officer who had been detailed to
protect them (Edison had been threatened with death were he to make

"any invention which would make war more terrible"). Curious mem
bers of the public were also in tow. At one point, a young man stepped
up to Ford to introduce himself and ask for Ford's recipe for success.
"Work" was Ford's not-so-helpful answer.

That terse exchange shows that the presence of these two celebrities
was not to be mistaken for a statement of their availability for conver
sation with strangers. This was not the case at all. They could not avoid
being surrounded by the crowd, however, close enough to have their
own conversation overheard. "Great Scott, Ford, we were to meet our
wives at one o'clock-here it is now two," Edison supposedly said to
his companion. The two men "almost sprinted" to the teahouse, where
Mina Edison had remained when her husband did not show; Clara
Ford, not as forbearing, had returned to her hotel long before. "Noted
Pair Keep Walking Eight Hours" ran the San Francisco Chronicle's
headline; a subheadline was "Wives Have Long Wait." The story of
fered a comforting universal moral to readers who were not themselves
rich and famous: Husbands, even celebrity husbands, are forgetful by
nature, and upon occasion neglect their good wives, proving Celebrities
Are Just Like Us.

While in San Francisco, Edison and Ford also were feted at San Fran
cisco's Commercial Club. The overflow crowd of attendees begged Ford
to stand and say a few words, but he demurred. Edison laughed at
Ford's discomfort, and was spared being asked himself only because he



246 / 

had long before established that he did not make speeches in public.
From San Francisco, the Edisons and Fords traveled by private train to
Santa Rosa, where they visited Luther Burbank, the country's best
known horticulturalist, then headed south via train and automobile to
San Diego.

Press coverage of their joint California trip served to make more well
known Edison's association with Ford, and this brought some compli
cations. Strangers wrote Edison trying to reach Ford through his inter
cession. Some of Edison's own associates and distant acquaintances
made similar requests, assuming that they could count on Edison's in
troduction to gain entre to Ford's office, in order to make a business

pitch of one kind or another. Edison shunned all such requests.
Turning aside a request from a stranger was one thing; from a mem

ber of his own staff or own roster of musical talent, another. Edison had
his secretary, William Meadowcroft, do his best in 1916 to mollify Alice
Verlet, a singer who recorded for Edison's label and had sought a letter
of introduction to Ford. Meadowcroft explained that Edison and Ford
"preserve a strict neutrality in regard to each other's business affairs,
and never give these letters of introduction" for which they were fre
quently asked. He also said that the intertwining of the business and
personal lives was "of a very delicate nature," and the two were "ex
ceedingly punctilious" in keeping the two domains separate. Edison's
company had bought fifty automobiles from Ford's, paying the same
price as "absolute strangers to Mr. Ford or his Company." Conversely,
Ford had not received any discount when purchasing Edison phono
graphs or records.

Edison brushed aside countless requests like Verlet's. But a few years

later, in 1919, he relented in one case involving a distant associate whom
he had not personally met. The petitioner was one Lemuel Calvert
Curlin, proprietor of Curlin's Drug Company, of Waxahachie, Texas,
whose store sold Edison phonographs, in addition to chocolates, type
writers, silver and china, rings, lamps, and Kodak cameras. (Curlin was
ecumenical about brands: he sold Victor Victrolas, too.) Curlin had
written Ford Motor directly to apply for a Ford dealership and asked if



\247

Edison would write a letter on his behalf, testifying to the soundness of
his record. "I would not trouble a busy man like you," Curlin wrote Edi
son, "but for the fact that your organization knows my ability and Mr.
Ford's organization does not." The previous year, Curlin's company had

purchased $40,000 worth of Edison phonographs and records, even
though the cotton crop was poor and the influenza epidemic had hit his
territory hard, keeping prospective customers home. Curlin was respect
ful, without fawning. He had a track record with Edison, and asked for
nothing more than a letter documenting it.

When it arrived, Curlin's letter caught the eye of Meadowcroft (who
overlooked the Victrolas). "Mr. Edison," Meadowcroft wrote in a cor
ner of the letter. "Shall you break your rule in this case?" Edison re

sponded positively, directing that it be passed on to Ford's secretary.
"Say 1 send it because 1 want to make myself solid with one of our hus
tling dealers." The choice of adjective, "hustling," brings to mind Edi
son's wish, expressed many years earlier, to hear the voice of Napolon
rather than that of Jesus Christ because "I like a hustler."

When Meadowcroft dispatched Curlin's letter to Ernest Liebold, his
cover letter called attention to how"Mr. Edison rarely, if ever" wrote to
Ford in a matter that concerned Ford's business affairs. Liebold received

the request favorably and wrote Curlin immediately (though no deal
was arranged before Curlin's sudden death in 1922). Liebold also wrote
Meadowcroft with reassuring words, "We understand the many situa
tions which arise as a result of the widely known friendship between
Mr. Ford and Mr. Edison." He said Ford would be happy to consider
whatever business-related requests Edison chose to send his way. Never

theless, Edison continued to screen and deflect almost every request that
asked him to open the door to Ford's office.

Family members, however, enjoyed special status automatically.
Thomas Edison Jr. knew this and attempted repeatedly to strike busi
ness deals with Ford, writing Ford and Liebold directly. If he were not
the son of Ford's friend but merely a correspondent with unending re
quests, he would not have received any response. But Ford and Liebold

felt they could not ignore him, no matter what he asked for, so they



248 / 

humored him as best they could. They were also discreet; there is no ev
idence that they ever divulged to Edison their tribulations in dealing with
this son.

In June 1914, shortly after receiving the news that he would receive a
new car from Ford, Tom Jr. had the opportunity of meeting Ford for the
first time, and thanking him in person, at the wedding of his half sister,
Madeleine, at Glenmont. At that point, his car was being prepared at
the factory for shipment. When it finally was shipped out, Liebold
wrote Tom Jr. to expect it, and wrote him a second time about two
weeks later to see if it had arrived in good condition. Tom Jr. had picked
the new car up but failed to write Liebold back.

William Bee, who served as the principal liaison between the Edison
interests and Ford Motor Company, got an earful from Liebold about
Tom Jr.'s perplexing behavior. Tom Jr. had merely been slow in attend
ing to the basic courtesies. On the same day that Liebold was unloading
his complaints in a letter to Bee-and before Bee could pass those on to
Tom Jr.-Tom Jr. sent a thank-you letter to Liebold, opening with an
apology: "I have been so very enthusiastic over my new 'Ford Car'
which arrived a day or two ago that apparently I have neglected every
thing." He said that his wife complained that he "simply cannot leave
its side long enough to come in the house and eat."

Tom Jr.'s letter did not contain anything untoward, but it did not bring
a gratifying end to the ministory of Henry Ford's gift of a new car to
Thomas Edison's eldest son. A little complication remained to be re
solved. Ford Motor Company provided the new car with the understand
ing that it would be exchanged for Tom Jr.'s old Ford. The company took
possession, planning to recondition it and find uses for it as a demonstra
tor model. When Tom Jr. said he did not want to relinquish it, a game of
tug-of-war began: Ford Motor Company, one of the largest corporations
in the country, was pulling from one direction, and Tom Jr., seemingly un
grateful recipient of a new car, was pulling from the other. At stake was a
banged-up car with more than sixty thousand miles on it.

Tom Jr. did make a good case for holding on to the older car, even if
he risked appearing ungrateful. As he explained to Bee, the car had been



\249

given to him by his father and he held on to every gift his father had
ever provided for sentimental reasons. Having two cars would allow
him to continue his experiments in carburetion on one when the other
was needed to go into town on errands. Bee served as his advocate, for

warding Tom Jr.'s letter to Liebold and adding an offer to buy back the
older car that was now in the hands of Ford Motor Company. This
offer appears to have embarrassed Liebold, who hastened to accommo
date Tom Jr. He told Bee that he would gladly return the car to Tom Jr.,
once it had been fixed up in "first-class shape." Liebold would be glad
to drive it out personally.

When Liebold agreed that Tom Jr. was "fully justified in asking to re
turn" his old car, he said that he understood how highly prized it was as
an object of sentimental value. He did not say anything about Tom Jr.'s
work with carburetors, which Liebold knew from previous correspon
dence was work that Tom Jr. thought was destined to have great com
mercial value to Ford Motor Company. Though living on a peach farm,
Tom Jr. was still pursuing his dream of becoming a world-renowned
inventor-now, however, he was determined to make his mark in the
automotive world. Liebold, as the principal gatekeeper guarding the
inner sanctum of Ford's office, had to manage Tom Jr. with delicacy,
being warm to the person, the son of Thomas Edison, but blocking the
unproven inventor from interfering with Ford Motor Company's actual
operations.

Managing Tom Jr. was made all the more difficult because of his be
havior, which increasingly became erratic. In January 1915, he wrote to
Henry Ford, appealing for donations in the form of spark plugs and
other supplies that would help him perfect a "device," left unnamed,
"which I hope might prove of mutual benefit to us both." At this point,
before his mental decline had incapacitated him, Tom Jr. still under
stood, at least in the recesses of his consciousness, that Henry Ford was
surrounded by layers of protection designed to shield him from requests
such as this. "Mr. Ford dont [sic] think I am trying to take advantage of
you, my dearest and best friend on Earth." He reassured Ford that he

had Ford's interests at heart. Later in the year, he addressed Ford as



250 / 

"almost a Parent." He said he was overjoyed when he read that Ford
had attended the Panama Pacific fair so that the masses could "see the

one and only Mr. Ford." In the next sentence, he said, "At no time am I
away from you because my thoughts keep me with you and your many
gifts to me keep us companionship." In 1917, after visiting Ford in De
troit, Tom Jr. wrote Ford to thank him for the "infinite love you ten
dered me" and begged Ford for his photograph, whose place Tom Jr.
had marked out in advance on the wall, next to his father's.

The work on his gadget, intended to save fuel and named the "Ecorne
ter," was hampered by Tom Jr.'s progressively worsening illness. His
wife, Beatrice, described to Liebold in 1919 her husband's increasingly
severe headaches, culminating in a "collapse" that prevented him from
getting out of bed. His Ecometer attached to the air inlet of the carbure
tor and, according to Tom Jr., increased fuel efficiency by 20 to 50 per
cent. Ford's engineers, however, were unable to duplicate these results.
Both Tom Jr. and Beatrice attempted for years to persuade the company
to purchase the Ecometer for factory installation in all Ford cars, but
their lobbying efforts did not produce an order. The disappointment ap
pears to have exacerbated Tom Jr.'s incapacitating depression.

Tom Jr. could have taken some solace from the fact that his father's

plans to make his mark in the automotive field and win sales to Ford
Motor Company were no more successful than his own. Edison worked
on many facets simultaneously: a battery and related electrical equip
ment for a car equipped with an internal combustion engine, and, sepa
rately, a battery for an electric car. In late 1913, Edison excitedly
notified Ford that he had successfully run in his laboratory a stock Ford
engine, removed from a car chassis and equipped with his new electrical
system, for 130 continuous hours. The next year, however, when Edison
sent his batteries and equipment to Detroit for testing outside of his lab

oratory, they performed poorly. Liebold installed one of the Edison al
kaline batteries in his own car and discovered that it was insufficient to

power the car's lights, let alone a starter motor.



\251

As the sales manager responsible for the Edison storage battery,
William Bee did his best in April 1914 to convince Liebold and Ford to
give Edison and his battery researchers more time. The performance of
the batteries at this point was so embarrassing that Bee could do little
but commiserate with Liebold, telling his own stories of how the batter
ies had let Bee down, too. Recently, he had put his car in a paint shop
for a few hours and when he returned to retrieve it, "I couldn't start it
to save my life." Another time, a company-owned Ford had broken
down on Broadway and had had to be towed a couple of blocks before
the engine would catch. Essentially conceding that the batteries were
not close to being ready for commercial use, Bee said, "Everything has
got to be in apple pie order" for the batteries to work at all.

Bee could confirm the fatal flaws of the current generation of batteries
because he also had an excellent excuse: Edison had been too busy at
work on phonograph records and had neglected work on them. The next
month, Bee wrote Henry Ford with the happy news that Edison would
devote more time to the battery project. "When Mr. Edison finds out
that the present battery will not do the work," Bee said in another letter,
"HE WILL MAKE A BATTERY WHICH WILL DO THE WORK."

Edison was unable, however, to deliver on the promise. When the
newest versions of his batteries were sent to Ford in the summer of

1914, Henry Ford showed impatience with their deficiencies. Ford also

complained that Bee was leaking confidential information to others.
Bee avowed his innocence and reported that a starter motor he had in
stalled in his own car powered by an Edison battery had never failed to
start. The battery had also powered two headlights, two side lights, a
taillight, a meter light, an odometer light, and a Klaxon horn, and the
battery had never failed to maintain its charge. He wrote Liebold that
these were "absolutely straight facts and my battery has not been tam
pered with."

Ford placed considerable trust in Liebold's opinions, and Liebold, by
the end of 1914, had lost patience with Bee and the Edison alkaline bat

tery. On a frosty December morning, he had given the battery one final
chance to prove its reliability in cold weather. Liebold had had at his



252 / 

command factory mechanics to charge up the battery in his car and
make sure that all the equipment was in proper adjustment. When
Liebold came by the factory to pick up the car, he wrote Bee, "You can
imagine my surprise to get nothing more than a groan out of the bat
tery." When he finally got under way, the engine quit four or five times
during the morning's drive, and he had to rely on the hand crank to
restart it, as "there was no juice obtainable." At the end of the day,
Liebold directed the factory mechanics to disassemble the car and re
turn the Edison battery and starter to New Jersey.

Eventually, another company, Gray & Davis, would win the contract
to supply Ford Motor with starters and generators for Ford cars. So that
its equipment would work with Edison batteries, it invested in a refriger
ation plant to simulate cold conditions and its staff tried to engineer an
electrical system that could accommodate the battery's shortcomings.
The experiments ended without success; the task of making the Edison
battery work was declared "impossible." Ford dealers also registered
their negative feelings about the Edison battery, telling Gray & Davis
that if Ford equipped cars at the factory with Edison batteries, the deal
ers could not in good faith sell the cars to customers without first taking
on the new expense of replacing the factory batteries.

Throughout the process of evaluating options, Henry Ford stood
apart, maintaining an agnostic attitude until the test results were defini
tive. He did not intervene when Liebold, the company engineers, and
the dealers all agreed that the Edison battery was woefully underpow
ered and unsuitable. By having Liebold serve as liaison between his
company and Edison's, Henry Ford was able to protect his personal re
lationship with Edison. For his part, Edison also valued the personal re
lationship and did not ask Ford to reconsider when the company
selected other suppliers and technology. By the time of the 1914 fire,
Ford and his staff no longer regarded the Edison battery as a viable can
didate for use in Fords. Edison did not share his disappointment with
others and harbored no ill feelings toward Ford himself.

After Ford extended the disaster-relief loan of $100,000 immediately
after the fire, he made the tenth and last loan to Edison in May 1916.



\253

The total provided from 1912 to 1916 was $1.2 million. The first
$900,000 had been issued as notes secured by Edison Storage Battery
Company stock, but beginning with another slice in February 1914, the
last $300,000 had been unsecured, suggesting that Henry Ford had no

expectation of placing a future order with Edison's company, as there
were no anticipated royalty payments that could serve as collateral.
Edison did not give up hope entirely and continued to pursue a battery
powerful enough to start an engine. But later that year, he did concede
tacitly that sales to Ford Motor Company were not imminent when he
began to pay interest and repay the principal. Having a personal friend
as his company's banker was helpful when pinched finances forced him
in 1917 to ask Ford not to cash a check he had sent for $50,000, and
when he was ready to have that one cashed, to ask Ford at the same
time to put $196,102.81 of new checks in his pocket for "a little while"
until Edison had the funds to cover them. "The "little while" turned out

to be sixteen months. There were other instances when Edison could

not make regular payments, but he always returned to the schedule
when he could. In 1925, Ford forgave whatever debt remained-the
records are not clear about the amount-and the legal departments of
the two companies were put to work on memos that clarified the tax

implications.
Even when the fire placed Edison in his most dire financial straits,

Ford did not show the slightest concern about the repayment of the
loans. To Ford, Edison was an American hero-for inventing. Ford
knew from the beginning that Edison would likely have trouble manag
ing the business end of their relationship. When Ford described his
friend as "the world's worst businessman," he had gone on to say that
Edison "knows almost nothing of business." Business had brought the
two men together originally, but when business partnerships failed,
their personal ties were not weakened. The two actually got to spend
more time together than before because they began to take a camping
vacation together annually.

In the first year plans were made, 1916, Ford was unable to join Edi
son and the two others: Harvey Firestone, the tire manufacturer and a



254 / 

principal supplier to Ford, and John Burroughs, the naturalist. The
group traveled by car through the Adirondack and Green Mountains
and were equipped for comfortable camping by what Burroughs named
their "Waldorf-Astoria on Wheels that followed us everywhere."
Schedules could not be arranged for a joint vacation the next year, but
in August 1918, Ford was finally able to join Edison, Firestone, and
Burroughs for the first of three road trips traveling as a famous quartet,
and three more trips as a trio following Burroughs's death in 1921.

From the beginning in 1918, the group drew attention. Setting out
from Pittsburgh, the men spent ten days driving mountainous roads
through West Virginia, Virginia, and North Carolina. A contemporary
feature article would describe them as four grown men of varying
ages-Burroughs was eighty-one; Edison, seventy-one; Ford, fifty-five;
and Firestone, forty-nine-who briefly became boys again. These
"boys," however, did not shed their collective wealth and celebrity and
regain unself-conscious innocence. The four were part of a contingent
of fourteen, including Firestone's son, Harvey Jr., three friends, a chef,
and various assistants. The group rode in three cars and the camping
equipment and commissary followed in three trucks. A photographer
was always on hand to take still photos for distribution to the press and
movies for newsreels.

A trip diary kept by the Firestones, senior and junior, shows how
Ford and Edison had different traveling preferences, Ford being the
restless, perpetually active one, and Edison, sedentary. When one of the
vehicles broke down, which was almost a daily occurrence, Ford would
set to work on repairs, which he often completed on the spot without
need of new parts (on one occasion he secured a replacement bolt from
a farm implement and its cooperative owner). Edison would take a mid
day nap, curled up under a tree, "dropping off to sleep like a baby,"
wrote Burroughs. Edison was the only member of the group who had
brought newspapers and books along. He also packed batteries, wires,
and lamps, providing light for reading at camp in the evening. If his
attention was not required for something else, he would take up a
newspaper.



\255

The diary also shows that the ten-day trip was anything but a private
one. Each little mountain town that they approached knew in advance
of the group's approach and sent out a contingent of local notables in
many cars to greet the approaching celebrities and their factotums.
Each town presented new challenges to group members in how to man
age crowds of fans seeking autographs, or the opportunity to say hello
or ask that the esteemed visitors provide them with a speech. (In lieu of
speaking, Edison would offer deep bows to a gathering.) When the
campers reached the spot where the assistants had set up camp for the

night, they were often followed by curious locals. Their arrival any
where caused such predictable excitement that the only events worthy
of noting became those rare instances when someone failed to recognize
them or was inordinately shy.

The members reassembled for a similar expedition the next summer
in 1919 . Now the caravan had swollen to fifty cars and trucks trans
formed into moving billboards carrying placards "Buy Firestone Tires."
The group's arrival in every town was made into an occasion of consid
erable commercial benefit to the local Ford dealer, who used the free

publicity to push sales of new Fords. Newsreels about the campers,
such as Genius to Sleep Under the Stars, pretended to capture candid
views of the celebrities relaxing and were shown in movie theaters
across the country. A diary entry in a trip scrapbook suggests how the
images were obtained: "Members of the party accepted their fate and
allowed the camera-man to direct their motions and activities for the

next quarter of an hour."

In the late evening, after the cameramen and interlopers had left, the
men sat around the campfire and listened while Ford and Edison lec
tured the group about the nefarious deeds of Jews. Burroughs wrote
in his diary of how Ford "attributes all evil to the Jews or the Jewish
capitalists-the Jews caused the war, the Jews caused the outbreak of
thieving and robbery all over the country, the Jews caused the ineffi
ciency of the navy of which Edison talked last night." Burroughs was the
only voice present to counter the anti-Semitism. When Ford used Jay
Gould as an example of how Jews controlled Wall Street, Burroughs,



256 / 

who had been a childhood playmate of Gould's, took pleasure in telling
Ford that Gould's family was Presbyterian.

The camping vacation dispensed with the camping portion altogether
in 1920, when the wives of the principals were invited for the first time
and the group slept in hotels rather than tents. The next year, the collec
tion of star power was boosted, for one night, by the participation of
President Warren Harding, a friend of Firestone's. The president arrived
with an entourage of six Secret Service officers and ten reporters.

Edison did not greet the president with warmth. Instead, he used the
opportunity to make a show of his disdain of this"dude," as he called

any man who failed to meet his standards of manliness. When the pres
ident offered cigars to the men in the camp, Edison declared, "I don't
smoke, I chew." This was pure contrariness-everyone knew that Edi
son was a heavy smoker of cigars. Firestone, who observed the scene,
tried to put the best face on it later when describing the encounter, inter
preting what Edison said as a declaration that he "does not set up as a
hail fellow." Harding, the smooth politician, did not miss a beat. He
replied, "I think I can accommodate you" and pulled out a plug of
chewing tobacco from his hip pocket, which Edison accepted. Edison
later announced, "Harding is all right. Any man who chews tobacco is
all right."

In 1924, the final year of the camping trips, the caravan stopped in
Plymouth, Vermont, to visit Harding's successor, Calvin Coolidge, at
his father's home. The participants enjoyed a joke that later circulated
about the group's ride to the local factory for a tour.

Something went wrong with the car and they stopped near a
farmhouse. The farmer came over to the party and offered his

help and at the same time started to lift the hood when Mr. Ford
stopped him and said: "There's nothing the matter with that en
gine: I'm Henry Ford and I know all about engines." The farmer
then suggested the trouble might be in the battery and Mr. Edi
son spoke up and said: "No, I'm Thomas A. Edison and I know



\257

all about batteries. That one is all right." The farmer began to
look incredulous but tried again by suggesting the tires needed
air and offered to pump them up, but Mr. Firestone put in with,
"No, I'm Harvey Firestone and I made those tires; they're just
right." The farmer exploded at this with, "Well, Ford, Edison,
and Firestone, eh? I reckon that little runt in the back seat's
Calvin Coolidge?"

Henry Ford took a keen interest in how fully the press paid attention
to the trips. In 1918, his first year with the group, he had his staff pre
pare a report that contained the full text of every newspaper story that

had reported on the expedition. Later, he claimed in his memoirs that
"the trips were good fun-except that they began to attract too much
attention." This does not jibe with the contemporaneous evidence that
Ford loved nothing as much as the attention the trips attracted. Charles
Sorensen, Ford's longtime lieutenant, presented in his own memoirs a
skeptical view of Ford's claim: "With squads of news writers and pla
toons of cameramen to report and film the posed nature studies of the
four eminent campers, these well-equipped excursions ... were as pri
vate and secluded as a Hollywood opening, and Ford appreciated the
publicity. "

Edison never commented on the trips, but his daughter Madeleine
did, when reflecting back upon them from the vantage point of 1972,
when she was in her eighties. She retrospectively dismissed them as a
"publicity stunt" that had been staged by Firestone. Her father did not
really care for them, but "he would let himself be taken in to these
things." It is not likely that this was the case, however. In all other do
mains, her father did exactly as he pleased. We can assume that Edison
went on the trips because he enjoyed them.

The most detailed vignette we have of Edison and Ford conversing
together is from a later time, in 1929, when Edison was eighty-two. The
scene is preserved in the autobiography of Edward Bernays, the master
practitioner of modern public relations, who was working as a consultant



258 / 

to Ford and happened to be on hand one afternoon when Ford and Edi
son had lunch together. The difference between what Bernays expected to
witness and what he actually saw was great.

After our little walk we sat on the porch for lunch. I was de
lighted to be lunching with two of the great men of the time and
looked forward to learning something from their words of wis
dom. Mr. Ford cupped his hands (Edison was extremely hard of
hearing) and said in a loud voice, "What makes you look so
well, Tom?"

Edison didn't hear the first time and Ford repeated the ques
tion. A look of understanding and warmth came into the old
man's face and in a low voice he said, "My wife makes me take
liver pills every day."

"How many pills does she give you, Tom?"
That, too, demanded a repeat. "Three a day, Henry."
Throughout the luncheon the conversation revolved around

this subject. So all I really learned at that luncheon was that
Mrs. Edison's liver pills seemed to help the inventor.



CHAPTER TWELVE

LETTING GO

LIKE
TOM SAWYER, Thomas Edison heard eulogies delivered

well in advance of his actual funeral-in Edison's case, up to

thirty years early. The Man Who Defeated Darkness. The Dean
of Inventors. The Man Who Struck the Magic Spark. The Greatest Single
Benefactor of the Race. The Archdeacon of the World. The Greatest

Citizen of the World. Flattering, yes, but such honors were those be
stowed upon a has-been, a statue for a museum. In his fifties, Edison
was not ready-he would never be ready, even in his eighties-to step
off the stage, to leave the lab, to rest on the laurels that went back to
1877 and those magical five years that followed. He resented being
treated like a statue; admirers no longer seemed to listen to what he had
to say. When an eighth-grader wrote him in 1915 with a few questions,
asking for advice that would be useful to a student "wishing to take up
your work," Edison replied that he did not like "to give advice as no
one ever takes it."

Even as he said these words, he was being asked for advice from a
source that had never asked before: the federal government. Invited to

head up the new Naval Consulting Board, which would offer the mili
tary the perspective and guidance of the civilian scientific community,
Edison agreed to serve. When the United States entered World War I, he
increased his advice-giving activity, volunteering to devote all of his
time to applied research on behalf of the U.S. Navy. At the end of the
experience, he learned that nothing had changed: His advice was not

259



260 / 

acted upon. "I produced forty-five different inventions for the Govern
ment during the war," Edison said afterward. "Everyone of them was
pigeon-holed. "

Edison wanted to live in the present, not in the past. At the same time

that his current research interests were slighted, he was showered with
praise for having created in the past entire industries out of nothing
ness. One moving tribute he received was in the form of a letter of ap
preciation sent in 1921 by one Mrs. W. C. Lathrop, of Norton, Kansas.
Lathrop was a college graduate, the wife of a surgeon, the mother of
four children, and the sole housekeeper of a large home. While her elec
tric washing machine chugged away happily, she realized that "it does
seem as though 1 am entirely dependent on the fertile brain of one thou
sand miles away for every pleasure and labor saving device 1 have." The
house was lighted with electricity, cooled with electric fans, and cleaned
with an electric vacuum cleaner; her kitchen was equipped with a Wes
tinghouse electric range and an electric dishwasher and an electric pres
sure cooker (handy on one occasion for an impromptu dinner with the
visiting governor); the family's clothes were sewed and washed and
ironed with electric appliances. For relaxation, she enjoyed the use of
an electric massager and a Victrola, "forgetting I'm living in a tiny town
of two thousand where nothing much ever happens." When her hus
band returned home exhausted at the end of his workday, she was
"now rested and ready to serve the tired man." If he did not want to lis
ten to music on the Victrola, she would take him to see "a masterpiece
at the 'Movies.'" For all this, she said, "please accept the thanks, Mr.
Edison, of one of the most truly appreciative woman [sic]."

As a testimonial to the conveniences provided by electrical appli
ances, this was a most gratifying letter. Lathrop's reliance on electricity
was far ahead of many parts of the country-even ahead of Edison's

household at Glenmont, which was still using a small army of human

housekeepers and relying on a gas stove (an electric range was never in
stalled). But the very fact that the only two brand names that Lathrop
mentioned-Victrola and Westinghouse-were his competitors' says
much about the Wizard's mismanagement of business opportunity. Edi-



\261

son's legacy was enhanced more by mistaken associations between his
name and competitors' products than by the sales of his own.

Over time, however, Edison had become an accidental captain of in
dustry in several lines. Aside from musical records and phonographs,
these were in fields that the general public would not likely associate
with the famous inventor. Each represented a story of Edison's ambition
that had been thwarted elsewhere-the failed venture in ore processing
that had led to cement production; the failed venture in automotive bat
teries that had developed into an industrial-battery business specializing
in sales to ships and railroads. Or, in the case of the "Ediphone," the ver
sion of the phonograph sold for office dictation, it was a story of the
inventor's stubborn refusal to relinquish his very first idea of what
the phonograph was best suited for. In 1911, he set up a new umbrella
company, Thomas A. Edison, Inc., which would soon encompass most of
his existing businesses, including the phonograph, records, movie equip
ment (retained after he had left the movie-production business), batter
ies, and chemicals. This company's fate would determine the longevity
of the Edison brand name in the marketplace.

Like any technology-based business, Thomas A. Edison, Inc., needed
technical and managerial talent to direct its many separate business di
visions. Edison had never been comfortable sharing control, however,
and his tight grip on the rudder did not weaken as he grew older. Even
at the entry level, new employees were selected for docility. Edison
wrote to a correspondent in 1916 about a candidate who was recom
mended for his great promise as an inventor, "We have found it very un
desirable to take into our employ young men whose talents run to
invention." He stated flatly that he had no place for the candidate.

Long before this, in the 1880s, Edison had been unwilling to step aside
for the manager who most clearly had shown precocious brilliance
Samuel Insull. Edison's businesses would have grown manyfold if they
followed the growth of the companies that Insull went on to manage in
his post-Edison career.



262 / 

Insull's story is characterized by boldness of action that exceeded
anything Edison had tried. When he had left Edison's side, he had been
determined to find a chief executive position. In 1892, he passed up an
offer to be a vice president in Henry Villard's North American Com
pany in order to become president of Edison Chicago, a small electrical
power utility that could pay him only half of what he had made in New
York. He also had to move to Chicago, a place that seemed to a New
Yorker like a "frontier town." Willing to take risks, he picked up for a
bargain price a state-of-the-art engine and pair of generators from Gen
eral Electric that had been on display at the 1893 world's fair. In only
his second year on the job, he arranged to acquire his larger competitor,
the Chicago Arc Light and Power Company. Branching farther out, he
acquired coal mines and a steam railroad that provided vertical integra
tion. Most innovative of all, he introduced new pricing schemes to en

courage high-volume residential use spread over the entire day so that
he could optimize the greatest volume of business for the least possible
capital investment. With the acquisition of neighboring utilities, he cre
ated a six-thousand-square-mile regional network of power.

Insull was no less an innovator in the spending of his wealth. He gave
generously to many charities and used his clout to press Chicago's
wealthiest to join him, even if they did not share his color-blind enthusi
asm for some causes, including the Chinese YMCA and the education
of African doctors. He paid to send a young African American singer on
a study tour of Africa and an African American Pullman conductor on a
European trip. Tweaking his fellow plutocrats, he built a new opera
house in Chicago that by design lacked boxes: All patrons would be
seated shoulder to shoulder on the same plane.

Even as Insull became famous-officially so when his portrait was
placed on the cover of Time magazine in 1926-he continued to make
himself available to whoever wished to call him at home, and he in
sisted that his phone number remain publicly available. One caller
asked, "Mr. InsulI, I don't want to be rude, but some of us fellows got to

talking, and we wondered, well ... Are you Jewish?" (Insull answered,
"Not as far as I know.")



\263

Insull's generosity in philanthropy and willingness to speak personally
to anyone stand out in sharp relief to the habits of Edison. When asked
in 1911 to donate to a building drive for a YMCA in Port Huron, a boy
hood home, Edison responded with a small pledge and provided an ex
planation of why he would not provide more: "I can use surplus money
to greater advantage for all the people in conducting experiments."

Edison clung to the notion that whatever he worked on would bene
fit the world. The cult of celebrity had constructed for him the story
that whatever he touched, ipso facto, would benefit humanity. Having
heard it too many times to count, he had come to believe it was empiri
cal fact, and not recognize it for what it was: a frothy fiction created to
entertain readers. Without a philanthropic agenda of his own, he could
only react to whatever proposals randomly came his way.

Most of the time, his reaction was negative, but he was unpre
dictable. He replied no to his own town, the City of Orange, which re
quested a subscription to its summer concert series. Yes, $100 to the
Aviation Section of the Militia of the State of Ohio. No to the "colored

section" of the Orange YMCA, explaining he had already given $100
to the non-"colored" Y. Yes, a phonograph and 150 records to the
Essex County Jail in Newark to "bring to the inmates a little sunshine
in their confinement." No, returning a ticket to a concert benefit during
World War I for the New Jersey Soldiers' Relief Concert because "[i]nas
much as I am paying full salary of 47 of my employees now at the front
it seems to me that I am doing my share." Yes, $25 to a telegraph-skills
tournament to show that he had not "changed a particle" and would
"rather have the smallpox than a swelled head." No to Oberlin College
because he was using all of his "spare cash to start the pouring of con
crete houses for the labouring man."

In fact, Edison did not himself invest in the concrete houses. A New

Jersey real estate investor poured fourteen rental homes in Montclair
and Orange-claiming that they would stand for a thousand years
without need of any repair-but that seems to be as far as the investing
got. The only philanthropist who actually paid to have concrete houses
poured was Mrs. Mirabeau L. Towns, the wife of a Brooklyn attorney,



264 / 

who paid for twenty thousand concrete homes-concrete toy homes,
that is, that were distributed among the children of low-income families
in New York. The molds were miniatures of those designed by Edison.

In the early twentieth century, husband-and-wife couples maintained
separate spheres, including civic and philanthropic causes. Mr. and
Mrs. Edison were not exceptions: Mina Edison's ideas about social im

provement were hers alone. In the 1910s and 1920s, her favorite cause
was "play and recreation," which she believed should be "woven
through the warp of our whole existence."

Other social issues also drew her attention. She and fellow members

of the local Woman's Club of Orange took on the alarming appearance
of low-necked ball gowns, but their ability to enforce their own defini
tion of what she called "a high tone of quiet respectability" was limited
to the club's own balls. She also belonged to the Housewives League,
which was incensed about the retail price of eggs. To make their point,
the league rented a storefront and members personally sold eggs for less
than local grocers. With Mina's participation, the affair drew the atten
tion of the press, which described the unusual tableau of various classes

mingling at the league's store: "Handsomely gowned women waited on
poor Italian and negro housewives, who were eager to take advantage
of the bargains in eggs. Other women opened the crates and did heavy
lifting. "

Mina did not have the imagination to address big problems, and Edi
son, who had the imagination, did not have the interest. The one phil
anthropic venture to which he attached his name was the Edison
Scholarship, which was first awarded in 1929. It was conceived by one
of Edison's staff members and was intended to encourage high school
students to pursue technical studies in college. Each of the forty-eight
states and the District of Columbia were to name a top scholarship des
ignate, and these finalists would answer a questionnaire addressing
moral fitness as well as general knowledge, with questions composed
not just by Edison, but also by the other judges, who included Henry
Ford and Charles Lindbergh. This elaborate nationwide selection appa-



\265

ratus would lead to the selection of a single winner who would receive a
four-year scholarship to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

In his business and research projects, Edison became more timid as he
became older. While in his thirties, he had had the energy to tackle a

problem that had seemed to many to be insoluble: the "subdivision" of
the electric light that would make indoor use technically and economi
cally feasible. In his forties, he had continued to dream big and put his
winnings from the electric light business into the mining business. It had
ended disappointingly, but he cannot be criticized for timidity. In his
fifties, he did make another sizable bet. However, for this venture, pur
suing the improvement of the battery for an electric car, he had financ
ing from Ford that insulated him from personal risk. He continued to
steer clear of risk in his sixties and seventies.

Perhaps his timidity was a simple matter of the aging process, but
Samuel Insull provides a counterexample. At the time of the market
crash in 1929, Insull was himself seventy years old, but his age did not

prevent him from personally attempting to save the country from the
worsening depression. Insull was everywhere, financing new infrastruc
ture projects, rescuing beleaguered textile and shipbuilding industries,
saving the city of Chicago when it teetered on the edge of bankruptcy.
Biographer Forrest McDonald writes that "it appeared as if he were at
tempting to carry the entire American economy on his shoulders."

Insull put everything he had into the battle against impersonal eco
nomic forces far more powerful than he. His personal fortune had in
creased from around $5 million in 1927 to $150 million in 1929. But
his wealth resided entirely in shares of his holding company, the pub
licly traded Insull Utility Investments. By 1932, those shares were
worthless, and he had fallen so far in debt that a banker described him
as "too broke to be bankrupt."

Hundreds of thousands of investors in Insull Utility Investments had
placed their faith in him and had ridden along as the stock plummeted



266 / 

to the ground. They then turned upon the man they had viewed as civic
benefactor. The trajectory of his public career ended catastrophically.
Insull was indicted for mail fraud, embezzlement, and violations of the
Bankruptcy Act, enduring three trials in 1934 and 1935, and winning
exoneration in all three. (The prosecution's case in one instance had not
been helped when it introduced as supporting evidence Insull's tax re
turns, which showed that his annual salary was more than $500,000 a
year before the collapse, but his charitable contributions had annually
exceeded even that.) Insull died in 1938 in Paris, taking with him first
hand knowledge of Edison that only he possessed. He had told a State
Department escort in 1934 that he had "hundreds of stories" from an
earlier time before there were codes of ethics in business, but "I think
that it is best to let them die with me. If I told them I would be accused

of sullying Edison's memory and that I certainly have no desire to do."
Edison never had to pass through a mortifying ordeal such as Insull's

trials. Nor did he ever feel a civic obligation to offer service to the com
munity that was his longtime home, as Insull did in Chicago. Edison
had always sought isolation to protect his work routines, first in Menlo
Park, and then in West Orange, but this isolation left him unaware of
what his neighbors thought of him and his factories. When environ
mental problems, including mercury poisoning, caused by his battery
plant's use of industrial chemicals were called to his attention by a
member of his staff, he was dismissive. The pollution, however, and the
complaints, continued for years. One resident who lived across the
street from the plant sought to protect his daughter's endangered health
by demanding that the company either control its emissions or buy his
house so he could move elsewhere, and if the company did neither, he

promised he would personally kill Edison. The residents had no way of
knowing that Edison's company had hired a shady fixer to pay the
mayor and other local officials to turn their attention elsewhere (and we
know this only because the fixer, Joseph McCoy, talked about his activ
ities in his reminiscences as matter-of-factly as if his assigned post had
been at a lab bench).

Edison was self-absorbed, isolated, and convinced that he, and only



\267

he, knew best how to manage his business affairs. For a founder like

Edison, interested in retaining control above all else, the only possible
successor would be pliable by temperament and a close relation by
blood. For Mina Edison, keeping control of the business within the
family was also a matter of the highest priority. Charles Edison, her
next-to-youngest child, was an amiable and compliant young man per
fectly fitted to the role. In 1914, at the age of twenty-four, Charles was
named "first assistant" to his father.

As a child placed in the care of a French governess, his education had
begun well before starting kindergarten. But he had been an indifferent
student at the Hotchkiss School in Connecticut. By his own admission,
he was not much interested in becoming an engineer when he went to
Boston Tech (soon to be relocated to Cambridge and renamed the Mas
sachusetts Institute of Technology). After three years of college, he
could not muster the interest to finish his degree, especially when he had
a more interesting opportunity dangled before him. He chanced to men
tion to a family friend his lack of interest in the specialized studies
awaiting him in the fourth year at college. This friend happened to be
the head of the Boston Edison Company and in a position to offer an
unusual job to an undergraduate with no prior work experience: CEO
in-training, at full salary. Charles would rotate through the various de
partments and "see what makes a business tick." Even if his older half

brother Tom had once lamented being the son of the famous inventor,
Charles had no cause for similar complaint.

When Charles told his parents of his plan to abandon the remaining
course work for his degree and spend the next year as a senior manage
ment apprentice in a real business, his father readily assented and his
mother eventually came around. After his year at Boston Edison, he and
a buddy set off on a cross-country trip that took them to Colorado and
then to California, where they ran out of money and relied on their own
ingenuity to get themselves back home. This brief experiment in self
reliance came to an end, of course, when he took his assigned position
at his father's side at Thomas A. Edison, Inc.

Charles's older sister, Madeleine, would say years later that she hated



268 / 

being asked the question "What does it feel like to be Edison's daughter?"
Looking back, she said, "It didn't feel like anything but having a nice fa
ther that I cared about." She did sometimes wonder if her friends were

genuine friends of hers or "Thomas Edison's daughter's friends." Charles,
however, had no reason to doubt the genuineness of one friendship he
had struck up two years before he joined his father's business-with
Henry and Clara Ford's only child, Edsel, who was three years younger
than Charles. Both young men would very early take up positions of
nominal power at their fathers' companies, and both would discover
that their fathers would not be willing to step aside, even with the pass
ing of years. Whether they anticipated how their futures would mirror
each other's, they did sense that they already shared the experience of
being children of famous fathers, just as their fathers were beginning a
friendship that was partly based on the two men recognizing the simi
larity of their experiences as celebrities. Charles and Edsel also shared
an impulse to defy their fathers in small ways. Both were cigarette
smokers and conspiratorially savored the discovery that the other also
had failed to follow his father's anticigarette strictures. "Dear Fellow

Criminal," Charles began a letter to Edsel in 1914, reporting on the lat
est tests at the Edison lab of an electric light system for cars. He closed,
"Sincerely yours in Crime."

In his first year at Thomas A. Edison, Inc., Charles was not given
much to do. Even had he been inclined to begin to make changes imme
diately, he would not have been able to do so. His father made clear that
he had final say over all company matters, small and large. The only
place Charles had some autonomy was by stepping off the premises. He
and two senior company officials decided to set up an experimental side
business, selling Edison phonographs out of a retail shop in nearby East
Orange. Each of the three put in $10,000 as passive investors. The plan
was to hire a store manager and test new marketing techniques that
once validated in practice could be adopted by Edison's nationwide net
work of phonograph dealers. The Edison Shop of East Orange would
depart from standard retail practice by selling only phonographs. By
renting space in an unlikely location, a low-income neighborhood de-



\269

void of other retail storefronts, the investors believed that their success
in the face of unpromising circumstances would hasten the wide adoption
of their new approach to selling phonographs in a specialty shop.

Edison gave his approval, with this proviso: "You fellows mustn't ex
pect me to carry yOU." The terms would be the same as for other dealers,
though if they should end up losing money in the venture, he said he
might make them whole. The three partners vowed never to accept Edi
son's largesse. "It's a bet," said one. "If we lose we shan't welch; we'll
pocket our losses and smile."

Of the three investors, Charles Edison was the one who showed the
earliest understanding of the absurdity of filling a tony shop with classical
music and live recitals to sell the most expensive phonographs as if it sat
on Fifth Avenue, not in a dreary working-class suburb amid households
struggling to stay solvent. In September 1914, after the store had been
open one week, he playfully wrote Carolyn Hawkins, his girlfriend in
Cambridge, that "the store is going fine and tomorrow we're going to fig
ure up how little we are loosing [sic]." As a newly christened tradesman,
he was happy to report that he did not "have to pretend to be a gentle
man anymore." He did notice that the prospective customers who had
responded to an invitation-only opening "were all to [sic] rich to buy this
week although several have come in and sneered fashionably at us since."
Charles offered to send pictures of the shop so Hawkins could sneer, too.

Without waiting, Edison boasted to a business colleague that Charles
proudly referred to as "that boy of mine" -was proving a great success
at the phonograph shop. To his credit, Charles did not make any such
claims for himself. The shop, ill-conceived from the start, produced
sparse sales and ran up debts that it could not repay. After three years of

operation, it owed Thomas A. Edison, Inc., more than $21,000, a situa
tion that alarmed Charles more than his two partners. "This is awful,"
he wrote William Maxwell, one of the other investors. "What can we
do?" Maxwell was not concerned and argued that the "experimental"
nature of the store had "done a good deal of good" for the company.
No one else could see the claimed benefits-Maxwell himself had com

plained to the hapless store manager that "it seems incredible that day



270 / 

after day should pass without the sale of a single instrument." None of
the investors were willing to continue the dismal experiment; the shop
closed.

The ignominious end of the Edison Shop did not noticeably harm
Charles's nascent career as a business executive. In 1917, he was pro
moted from assistant to the founder to acting CEO. The rapid ad
vance-he was still only twenty-seven-came not because Thomas
Edison believed the time had arrived to permit a younger generation to

step forward. Nor did it come because Charles had been carefully ro
tated through the various departments, as he had at Boston Edison, to
gain a panoptic view of Thomas A. Edison, Inc. His father had contin
ued to run the phonograph business unilaterally as always, and the ex
ecutive education he provided Charles consisted primarily of posing
trivia questions at home: How many records were rejected at the plant
today? What is the name of the Edison dealer in Dubuque? Charles's
promotion came only because the Naval Consulting Board needed
Thomas Edison's presence full-time in Washington and at a Navy re
search laboratory. When the father departed, the son became the head
of the company-temporarily.

Charles did not dare tamper with any of the core business functions.

Instead, he busied himself in the one neglected corner in which his fa
ther had no interest: personnel matters. Thomas Edison paid little no
tice to his workers (except, of course, Red Kelley in Building 18, the one
who knew "a good chew"), and paid no attention to what lives they in
habited when they stepped outside the gates of his plant. Charles did
notice. Factory hours were 6:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.; in the winter, it was
dark when workers went in and dark when they came out. Twenty-two
saloons and bars lined the street that faced the main plant, and they
opened at 5 :00 A.M. for workers who had difficulty facing the grimness
of the workday without anesthetic.

Work was dangerous as well as dull. While serving his brief appren
ticeship at the company, Charles Edison had taken in a sight one day
that would long stay with him. The laboratory, though owned by the
man who as much as anyone made it possible for its lathes and other



\271

metal-working machines to be powered by electric motors, was still filled
with the overhead line shafts, belts, and pulleys of the pre-Edison era.
The sleeve of William Benedict, a maintenance worker who was attempt
ing to put a belt on a pulley while the line shaft was still turning, was
caught by the belt. Before the power could be shut off, he had been pulled
up to the shaft, then battered against the ceiling as he was whirled
around. The victim was carried out of the shop without any medically
trained person attending to him. The company's accident report blamed
the dead man for failing to abide by the company's rule to shut off
power prior to changing a belt. When asked to suggest "a practical
method" to prevent a repetition of this accident, the company did not

say, "By investing in electric motors, which use the power that our com

pany founder helped move out of the laboratory more than thirty years
ago." Instead, it recommended for itself a simpler, less-expensive course
of action: dismissing any employee who failed to follow the company's
safety rules.

When Thomas Edison departed for Washington, Charles Edison got
the chance to make changes at Thomas A. Edison, Inc., that made life for
factory workers less harsh and dangerous. Charles shortened the work
day to ten hours; put in a dispensary staffed with a nurse or doctor on
duty; and subscribed to the state's workmen's compensation plan, even
though other managers were convinced it would bankrupt the company.

He was young enough that when he began to search for ways to stanch
employee absenteeism, he turned to his old prep school, Hotchkiss, for
guidance on how to adapt the school's system of demerits to the Edison
factory. The two settings did not seem to him to be all that different. He
wrote the head of Hotchkiss, "The average mentality of a collection of
workers is about on the same plane of immaturity as the High School un
dergraduate." From his personal experience, he knew the Hotchkiss sys
tem worked well. He still remembered "what healthy fear I stood of
getting beyond the allotted number of cuts."

As he felt his way in the new position of "Operating Manager and
Chief Executive," he was given the opportunity to tell the general public
what it was like to find himself at the top of the organization's pyramid



272 / 

at the age of only twenty-seven. In an article published in American
magazine, Charles described "My Experiences Working for Father."
The principal purpose of his controversy-free account was to correct
the impression that some readers may have had that his was an easy life.
He described how, when he had walked into a notary office one day and
made his identity known, the notary had laughed: "Well, I guess you
don't have to worry much! It's pretty soft for you fellows that can work

for your old man." Charles smiled politely, but told readers that working
for his father was anything but easy because he did not receive special
treatment. (It did not occur to him to mention his appointment as CEO.)

Within Thomas A. Edison, Inc., Charles was aware that he was re

garded as green and inexperienced by older line managers and that he
could not make major changes without stirring up criticism and resis
tance. He tried to disguise his reforms by putting them in the hands of
the second in command. Mina, who insisted on detailed accounts of

everything he did, was unhappy her "Charlsie" would not receive the
credit he deserved. She told him, "I do want your hand at the helm
without any doubt about it."

In March 1918, Charles Edison announced his intention to make one
more change: While he and Carolyn Hawkins were vacationing with
Mina in Fort Myers, the young couple decided to marry-immediately.
Charles wired his father aboard the USS Sachem, which was stationed
not far away, off Key West, to ask for his blessing. Edison bestowed his
approval with characteristic absence of sentiment. "If you have decided
it must be, then the sooner it is done the better," Edison wrote his son.
He lightened this with an attempt at levity: "It can't be worse than life
in front line trenches." He closed by saying that it would be impossible
for him to attend the wedding.

When the war ended, so, too, did Edison's unhappy experience with
the Navy, which had consistently ignored his suggestions. He returned
to his own laboratory, where he was master of his domain. Charles was
permitted to remain as the head of the business, but only nominally. His
father had no interest in Charles's new Personnel Department and re
duced its size, then eliminated it altogether, growling, "Hell, I'm doin'



\273

the hirin' and firin' around here." Edison ordered dismissals through
out the executive ranks, over the protests of Charles, and then, begin
ning in 1920, when the postwar depression arrived, Edison fired plant
workers in large numbers. ("Merrily the axe swings," said Charles sar
donically during one of his father's campaigns to reduce the work
force.) Employees were selected for severance by Edison personally.
A. E. Johnson, a longtime employee, described Edison's methodology:
"What he'd do, whenever he'd think that the overhead was getting too
much, you know, and they'd been hiring a lot of men that weren't
needed, he'd start on one of his firing campaigns.... If he saw you
coming down he'd stop you and say, 'Who are you, what do you do?'
You'd tell him, he'd ask a couple of questions ... [and if he did not like
the answers] he'd say, 'You're fired.'" Johnson thought the process was
harmless because many of those "fired" would report the news to their

supervisor, who would then instruct them not to pay any attention to
what Edison had said. Still, between 1920 and 1922, Edison did suc
ceed in drastically reducing employment in the company's manufactur
ing plants from ten thousand to three thousand.

While Charles Edison sat mutely as the figurehead chief executive, his
father put into place a "mental fitness" test that all college graduates
who applied for work at Thomas A. Edison, Inc., were required to pass.
Edison composed the test himself. It drew wide attention because of the
audacity of Edison's antimodern message: To him, the college degree
was a meaningless credential; the subjects studied in college had no rel
evance to managerial decision making; and the prevailing ethos of the
college education-that an educated person learned where to look for
knowledge-was useless. All he cared about was what facts a manage
ment candidate could produce on command by answering 163 ques
tions in ninety minutes. In its first two years of administration, only
about 4 percent of applicants passed. The average college man, he drily
commented, is "amazingly ignorant."

Thanks to an unsuccessful candidate who claimed to recall 141 ques
tions (which, if true, should have earned him a passing mark in a special
category), newspapers published the test and the reading public had the



274 / 

chance to see how it would do. A question sampler: What countries
bound France? Where is Spitsbergen? Where do we get prunes from? Of
what wood are kerosene barrels made? What states bound West Vir

ginia? Where are condors to be found? What states produce phos
phates? What is the weight of air in a room 20' x 30' x lor? How is
sulfuric acid made?

When the questions were revealed, editorial writers picked up their
pens to condemn the examination from every angle. The New York
Times pointed out that Edison could not grade "the human soul." Why
was it important to know what copra was, it asked, unless one clerked
in a grocery store? The Chicago Tribune sent a reporter to the Univer
sity of Chicago to see how well current students would do on the test
and, not surprisingly, they did not do well (no one, in fact, could handle
that question on the bounding of West Virginia). When Albert Einstein
arrived in Boston, he was confronted with what one paper called the

"ever-present Edison questionnaire" and was asked, "What is the speed
of sound?" He was not able to say, he replied calmly through his secre
tary, but pointed out that the answer was readily available in reference
books. The headline in the New York Times gave readers this summary
of the news story: "Einstein Sees Boston; Fails on Edison Test."

The test originally began without publicity, and Edison is likely to
have devised it simply to cut off the annoying importuning by various
managers and acquaintances to place their own sons, nephews, and
grandsons into management positions in his company. That said, hav
ing placed Charles as company head, Edison was in no position to pre
tend that he proscribed nepotism.

Once the examination had come to the attention of the general public,
however, and the pettiness of its content was roundly criticized, Edison
defended his creation with justifications that were, by all appearances,
conjured as he went along. He said that he needed the kind of manager
who could make decisions without delay, without "waiting to find some
thing out that he might have had right in his head." The inability of one
of his managers to have memorized crucial data had, he claimed, cost the



\275

company as much as $5,000 (in a way that was left unspecified). The
more that Edison's exam was criticized, the more obdurate he became.
When newspapers published the correct answers in addition to the ques
tions, rendering the exam useless, Edison was undaunted and drew up a
second exam consisting of questions as picayune in nature as those in the
first. Later, he said he was surprised to discover that he could continue to
use the first exam because candidates did no better on it than on the sec

ond, which proved to him that "the average college man doesn't read
newspapers.

"

Few businesspeople defended Edison's methodology. Nor was Edi
son's friendship with Henry Ford helpful in Edison's public campaign to
defend the questionnaire. In a letter to the editor of the New York
Times, a resident of West Orange asked Edison to explain his close rela
tionship to "a well-known automobile manufacturer whose inability to
answer the most elementary questions asked him in the courtroom
about a year ago made him the laughing-stock of the entire English
speaking world." Ford had initiated a libel suit against the Chicago Tri
bune and testified at the trial that he did not read anything in the
newspaper but headlines. Inadvertently contradicting the basic premise
of the Edison questionnaire, Ford had said he was not concerned about
his own lack of understanding a given topic because "I could find a man
in five minutes who could tell me all about it."

Edison's youngest son, Theodore, was a sophomore at the Massachu
setts Institute of Technology, and, unlike Charles, academically inclined
with special strengths in mathematics and the sciences. He gamely sat in
his dormitory room for a mock examination by a reporter who admin
istered Edison's questionnaire. Theodore's impromptu calculation of
the vibrations per second of a red ray of light was impressively accurate,
but he did not know where La Paz was the capital, what states bounded
Idaho, nor what two rivers converged near Pittsburgh. At the end of the
exercise, his self-evaluation was that he had "failed" the test. The pre
tend exam would be all he would face, however. When he graduated
two years later, his father said Theodore could have a position at the



276 / 

family company without having to endure the questionnaire. Theodore
was in no hurry: He elected to stay at college for graduate work before
joining his brother at the company.

As the phonograph business declined, the famed Edison name was at
tached to small kitchen appliances that the company resorted to selling
in desperation. Theodore was put to work on electric coffeemakers,
waffle irons, and toasters. His technical talents would have been a valu
able addition to Thomas A. Edison, Inc., had his father been more re

ceptive to his and brother Charles's suggestions for a fundamental

change in strategic direction for the struggling company. The phono
graph business faced a challenge in the 1920s unlike any that had come
before: the advent of commercial radio stations and the wide availabil

ity of free music broadcasts and other entertainment. By the end of

1921, an estimated 1 million listeners had access to radios and listened
to programs broadcast from the eastern seaboard. A single station in
Roselle, New Jersey, which offered the voices of operatic stars among
its musical programs, had a broadcast range of a thousand miles, cover

ing New England and the mid-Atlantic states, and reaching as far west
as Missouri. A contemporary newspaper account explained to readers
not yet acquainted with the phenomenon that those who owned radio
sets could enjoy entertainment that was" literally as free as the air."

Charles and Theodore Edison could see that if the company were po
sitioned as being in the music business rather than just in the phono
graph business, it could offer a combination phonograph-radio that
would permit its product line to evolve with this new line of consumer
technology. Their father need not feel slighted because the vacuum tube,
the key component in the radio set, was a modern descendant of Edi
son's experimental work on the incandescent bulb.

Edison did feel slighted, however. Such, at least, was the opinion of
Thomas Cowan, a former employee who was working for Westing
house in 1921, conducting experiments in radio broadcasts with the aid
of a phonograph that Edison was willing to loan him. Cowan had sev
eral conversations about radio with Edison, who became upset and re
called the loaner when he heard the Westinghouse broadcasts and was



\277

appalled at the poor quality of the sound. Edison appeared resentful
that he had not personally developed the vacuum tube. He did not
quash this impression when he hung a sign on his door: "I will not talk
radio to anyone."

Theodore Edison held to a different explanation of his father's refusal
to consider his and Charles's recommendation to enter the radio business.

His father's hearing had deteriorated further. The only way he could
hear music that was reproduced electrically was by wearing headphones
with the volume set to an extremely high level, producing extreme dis
tortion. It also produced sparks that darted out from the earphones,
making the staff uneasy about accidentally electrocuting their employer.
That experience convinced his father that radio could not reproduce
music without distortion. Without Edison's personal approval, the com
pany's preparations to enter the radio business were frozen.

Edison's sentimental attachment to the phonograph and his resis
tance to entering the radio business were on display side by side in
1922, on the occasion of the phonograph's forty-fifth birthday. "I have
the phonograph close to perfection," Edison boasted, not for the first
time. As for radio, his experience with it on submarines during his
wartime research had shown him that the "mutilation of sounds" was a

problem that was not amenable to solution. He had all the empirical
data he needed, and once his opinion was set, he had no wish to reopen
the matter. In 1924, he reiterated, "We would not for a moment think
of combining a phonograph with a radio."

Until 1925, radio receivers were powered by batteries. When manu
facturers introduced a new design that drew upon electrical current,
sales climbed steeply. His sons continued to press him to reconsider and
enter the radio business, but Edison remained unmoved: The "radio
fad," as he called it, would soon pass.

Father and sons could see that their phonograph business was disap
pearing, and none of them showed much interest in the waffle irons and
other kitchen appliances that had been introduced to carryon the Edi
son name in the form of the "Edicraft" line. The design of the small ap
pliances was innovative-the Edicraft Automatic Toaster had springs



278 / TH E WIZARD 0 F" MENLO PARK

that pushed the heating elements away from the toast rather than pop
ping it into the air-but customers did not want to see novelty tricks
performed by their toaster, nor did they wish to pay premium prices.

The business struggled. With Edison in his eighties and still working,
he and his sons wanted to distance themselves from the humiliations of

plying the electric toaster trade. They shared existential anxiety about
defining Edison's legacy in the domain of business with a project that
was as grand in scale as those in the past that had secured his reputa
tion. Where should Thomas A. Edison, Inc., head during Edison's re
maining time among the living? The two generations did not agree on
the answer.

Edison elected to start an entirely new career in industrial botany,
based at his winter home in Fort Myers. With the financial support of

Henry Ford and Harvey Firestone, he established a new company, the
Edison Botanic Research Company, whose mission was to discover a
source of rubber that could be cultivated in the United States as a

backup source in case war interrupted imports from Southeast Asia.
Ford and Firestone provided Edison with $500,000 annually to pursue
the project. The official history gives us an inspiring tale of the octoge
narian testing seventeen thousand different varieties of domestic plants
in the course of discovering that goldenrod would serve as an alterna
tive source. This sanitized version acknowledges that his findings were
never actually used; by the time of World War II, synthetic rubber had
been invented. But the story still serves the purpose of showing Edison's
desire for new challenges, even when his age was advanced and his
health was failing; he suffered from diabetes and stomach problems
that probably were caused by radiation exposure in his laboratory years
earlier.

Edison's rubber research was not successful, and he apparently cov
ered up the failure in order to keep his external funding intact. An em
ployee of the Fort Myers laboratory claimed that the goldenrod
mixture, which Edison showed Ford to be able to demonstrate that the
research had achieved success, had surreptitiously been enriched with
real rubber-from condoms purchased in bulk for this purpose. The



\279

same employee also observed Harvey Firestone tearfully explaining to
Edison that the collapse of business due to the Depression meant that he
could no longer continue his support of Edison's laboratory. After Fire
stone left, Edison was heard sneering, "He's a God damned light
weight." (Ford doubled his own contribution so that the funding
continued undiminished.)

While their father was absorbed in the rubber project and spending
more time in Fort Myers, Charles and Theodore took steps out of his
view to try to ensure that the Edison name would have a place in the
evolving music business. Late though the hour was, they set up a re
search group in Orange to make a phonograph with an electric pickup
and moved ahead on plans to introduce a radio. With prototypes ready,
they succeeded in extracting their father's grudging assent, but he pre
dicted the experiment would result in a financial bath.

Edison's fears were realized, though it had been his intransigence that
put the company at such a great disadvantage as a late entrant. Even
when Charles and Theodore were free to act without stealth, they were
dogged by problems obtaining a necessary license from General Elec
tric, setting up an expensive production facility, and selecting a design
that would be affordable to consumers. On 9 October 1929, Charles

prepared a report for his father that showed a loss for the company of
$1.3 million due to start-up costs for the radio, which, to put the best
face on it, was no more than the average annual loss for the company in
the previous five years. Still, the company had assets in the form of Lib
erty Bonds, and Charles remained hopeful that losses from the radio
would not, as he put it, "sink the ship." He could not know that two
weeks later the stock sell-off would begin with Black Thursday, on
24 October-followed by Black Monday and Black Tuesday-and
business conditions would deteriorate apace.

A few days later, Thomas A. Edison, Inc., announced that it would
cease producing records and refit the factory for the production of ra
dias. The announcement was accompanied by mention of regret as the
phonograph "was one of Mr. Edison's favorite inventions." If the com
pany was going to succeed in home entertainment, everything would



280 / 

ride on the success of its new radios and radio-phonographs. These were
sold not as tabletop sets but as stunningly beautiful pieces of furniture
designed for the high end of the market, not the best positioning in de
pression conditions. Each model was encased in a wide console standing
about four feet high, finished in walnut and hidden behind sliding doors.
The sales literature seemed to be addressed less to the general public than
to Edison himself, the sons boasting of the "engineering refinement" that
provided volume levels ranging "from a whisper to a mighty crescendo
and both without distortion!"

A year later, Charles and Theodore informed their father that there
was no point in continuing a hopeless endeavor, and the radio produc
tion was shut down immediately. Charles wrote his father with bitter
sweet feelings about the end of the experiment: "Radio is the last of our
products to carry the name Edison in the house. Altho [sic] we have lost
a pile of money there is at least the solace of knowing that it was a good
product worthy of the name, and that we have nothing to be ashamed
of in the way it was sold." He thanked his father for being willing to
pay the bills despite his personal misgivings. "We have had our battles
and differences of opinion," Charles wrote, "but when all is said and
done you will stand out for me as the 'world's best sport.'

"

The sons could not undo decades of poor decisions that their father

had made regarding the phonograph and the entertainment business.
Edison had insisted on keeping control of the phonograph for too long,
to the detriment of the business. But his reputation as the nation's super
inventor nonpareil, the man who had single-handedly brought into
being multiple industries, was so unquestioned that he did not have to
do anything more in order to collect compound interest denominated in
fame. In 1923, Edison was credited with the creation of industries then
worth $15.6 billion and employing 1.5 million people. Henry Ford's
personal net worth was estimated at that point to be $2 billion, but the
New York Times said that "the business community has found Edison

eight times as valuable as Ford."
Polls that inquired about the Most Useful American or the Greatest

American were a perennial source of entertainment during Edison's life-



\281

time, and his name always ranked high. Perhaps the most unintention
ally entertaining poll was that conducted in 1922 among the 750,000
youth group members of the Methodist Episcopal Church who were
asked to vote for the "greatest man in history." Edison was given top
place, edging out Theodore Roosevelt and Shakespeare. Henry Ford
gave Edison top place, too, and his vote would count more than anyone
else's because of the funds he cheerfully deployed to honor his designee
and friend. About a decade before Ford famously declared in 1922 that
"history is bunk," he had begun purchasing old agricultural imple
ments, wagons, pre-Ford horseless carriages, and other artifacts of an
earlier age. He had no interest in history that was ancient and foreign
and intellectual-he had followed his "history is bunk" declaration
with the rhetorical question "What difference does it make how many
times the ancient Greeks flew their kites?" -but he was passionately in
terested in history that was near-recent, American, centered on technol
ogy, and tactile. He began plans to build a "historic village" in Dearborn
that would provide visitors with an appreciation of the nation's techni
cal ingenuity. It emerged as Greenfield Village, and contained a full
scale re-creation of Thomas Edison's Menlo Park laboratory complex
built as much as possible with materials salvaged from the original site.
Ford had seven railcars deliver soil from the New Jersey site, so authen

ticity could be claimed even for the dirt.

For Edison's eighty-second birthday in February 1929, Ford made a gift
of $5 million to establish an endowment for his museums' collection of
Edisonia and to establish a technical school in Edison's name. Later that

year, he arranged to dedicate the opening of Greenfield Village with an
enormous celebration, Light's Golden Jubilee, honoring Edison on the
occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the invention of incandescent

light. President Herbert Hoover, John D. Rockefeller Jr., J. P. Morgan,
Marie Curie, Orville Wright, and Will Rogers were among the five hun
dred invited guests who joined Ford and Edison for the festivities. After
the evening banquet, Edison, Ford, and Hoover walked to the unlit



282 / 

Menlo Park laboratory to playa scripted melodrama fancifully re
creating the first lighting of the electric light. The radio announcer
solemnly intoned: "Mr. Edison has two wires in his hand; now he is
reaching up to the old lamp, now he is making the connection. It lights!
Light's Golden Jubilee has come to a triumphant climax!" Americans
around the country who were listening to the live broadcast had duti
fully followed the instruction to turn off their household lights until
Edison had again provided the world with light, and then, upon cue,
they turned on their lights again as car horns blared.

When the party returned to the banquet hall, Edison plopped on a
davenport just inside the door. He appeared overwhelmed by emotion
and told Mina, "I can't go in." She said, "You are the whole show, you
know," and offered to get him a glass of milk. The milk provided what
he needed. He got up, reentered the hall, and carried on. On this excep
tional evening he did that rarest of things: He made a public speech. It
offered thanks to President Hoover, the guests, and Henry Ford, about
whom he said, "I can only say to you that in the fullest and richest
meaning of the term, 'He is my friend.' Good night."





AFTER
THE LIGHT'S Golden Jubilee, Edison lived two more

years, working less, napping more. He summoned the energy in
January 1931 to sign off on one more patent application, for a

"Holder for Article to Be Electroplated." Its issuance brought his per
sonal total to 1,093, the leader in the patent office by a wide margin.
Most of the patents were for minor variations on previous ones-more
than 400 concerned electric light and power and almost 200 were for
phonographs and recording-and Edison had no compunction about
claiming credit for work done by assistants. But under his name, he
compiled a record that seemed to be unassailable.

Health matters, naturally enough, became Edison's principal preoccu
pation at the end. He remained unshakably certain that he was an expert
on medical matters and had long before developed all-encompassing claims
for a milk-only diet. When Mina Edison's sister Jane had died suddenly in
1898, Edison wrote Mina expressing shock-and admonished that if

Jane had only been put on a milk diet, nature would have had the oppor
tunity to "throw off the poisonous defective digestion and she would be
strong and hearty today." Over time, Edison had become more attached
to milk as an ever-reliable tonic, as he had shown on the evening of the
Golden Jubilee. In 1930, he explained he did just fine with nothing but
one glass of milk every two hours. He maintained that" 80 percent of our
deaths are due to over-eating." This conviction arose from his insight that
"auto-intoxication," that is, the accumulation of diseases in the bowels,

283



284 / 

was the cause of most deaths. The solution was "a matter of diet and lu

brication." He was the same medical authority who years before had said
that clothing that pinched was literally a killer: "Pressure ANYWHERE
means that a certain part of your body is deprived of its natural flood.
And starvation and death begin where the body is pressed and choked."

The theories did not protect him from kidney failure. In August
1931, he collapsed in his living room and spent ten days near death,
while a battalion of newspaper reporters turned Glenmont's ten-car

garage into a pressroom. He moved out of immediate danger, but his
energy had disappeared and familiar routines were abandoned. By Oc
tober, he was too weak to leave bed and remained "mentally drowsy,"
according to his doctor; he passed in and out of a coma and hovered on
the edge of death for two weeks. Newspapers issued multiple bulletins
each day reporting the slightest sign of improvement or decline. In the
early morning of 18 October 1931, Thomas Alva Edison died at the age
of eighty-four at home with his family at his bedside.

That day, the New York Times carried twenty-two stories about Edi
son's life and death. The blanket coverage was mirrored across all

media outlets. For more than fifty years, Edison had promoted his own
image and the notion that it was his hands alone that had performed
miracles. That preparatory work made the eulogies he received upon
death easy to write. His "genius" was credited in the Times with be

stowing upon humanity the gifts of the electric light, the phonograph,
the motion-picture camera, and "a thousand of other inventions," hy
perbole that confused the patent count with separate wonders. The as
terisk that should have been attached to each major invention was long
gone and history became the simplest form of story: In the beginning,
before Edison, there was only darkness. The governor of New Jersey
suggested that everyone in the state turn off their lights at 7:00 P.M. on
the day of the funeral "as a reminder of what life would have been like
if the inventor of the incandescent light had never lived."

Edison was given credit not only for bestowing light upon benighted
humanity, but also for making life worth living. When John Ott, seventy
five, a retired employee who had spent his entire working career with



\285

Edison, was told of Edison's death, he took the news hard, even though
it could not have been a surprise. Ott died within hours, and his death
was attributed to "shock" because he was "so stunned by the news of
the master's passing," according to fellow former employee Francis
Jehl. Ott's wheelchair and crutches were placed reverently at the foot of
"his master's" bier.

Whether Ott felt quite as bereft as press accounts described is an

open question, however. When Mary Childs Nerney had interviewed
him earlier for her biography Thomas A. Edison: A Modern Olympian,
Ott had observed with evident sadness that his children had grown up
without knowing their father because he worked late every night at Edi
son's side and never saw them. "Why did you do it?" Nerney had asked,
and Ott replied, "We all hoped to get rich with him," but he ruefully
observed that the only ones who succeeded in that ambition were those
who had left Edison's employ.

Employees, former or current, who harbored any bitterness toward
Edison made no appearance in the send-off, which resembled a state fu
neral. For two days, his bier was placed in the library of his laboratory
and made available for employees and the general public to file past and
pay a silent farewell. Declining the offer of the governor for a military
presence, his oldest employees formed themselves into an ad hoc honor
guard, standing with folded hands and bent heads at the foot and head of
the coffin, relieving one another at fifteen-minute intervals. Ten thousand
people filed past on the first day, and forty thousand the second.

Making New Jersey's plan to turn off all lights a national one, Presi
dent Hoover asked the country's citizens to mark their sorrow at Edison's
death by turning off all electric lights simultaneously across the country
on the evening of Edison's funeral, at ten o'clock eastern time. He had
considered shutting down generators to effect a perfectly synchronized
tribute but realized that it might lead to deaths; even this thought was
put in service of a tribute to Edison, for the country's life-and-death de

pendence upon electricity, he said, "is in itself a monument to Mr. Edi
son's genius."

Edison really had been privileged to hear his own eulogy in advance:



286 / 

The one read at the Light's Golden Jubilee two years before was used again
at his service. That night, the two radio networks, the National Broadcast
ing Company and the Columbia Broadcasting Company, jointly broadcast
an eight-minute tribute that ended on the hour, when listeners were asked
to turn out the lights. The White House did so and much of the nation fol
lowed, more or less together, some a minute before the hour, others on the
hour. On Broadway, about 75 percent of the electrified signs were turned
off briefly. Movie theaters went dark for a moment. Traffic lights blinked
out. Everything seemed connected to Edison: the indoor lights, the traffic
lights, the electric advertising, everyone connected via radio, which Edison
now received credit for helping "to perfect." In the simple narrative that
provided inspiration for posterity, one man had done it all.

His would be a hard act to follow, yet it was irresistible. All four of his
sons chose to pursue careers in the invention business. The two eldest

sons died not long after their father died. Thomas Edison Jr., after failing
to make a living from his Ecometer, had ended up working for Thomas
A. Edison, Inc., at the time of Edison's death. He died in 1935 at the age
of fifty-nine. William, the only one of the four who did not work for the
company, maintained a laboratory in his home basement, tinkering with
radio equipment and hoping to find the money to market a one-tube
radio set that he designed. He died in 1937 at the age of fifty-eight.

Charles and Theodore lived much longer but were not able to move
away from the shadow of their father. Charles continued to direct the

company, then was appointed secretary of the Navy and elected gover
nor of New Jersey. He died in 1969 at the age of seventy-eight.
Theodore left his brother's side and set up a small technical consulting
company. He died in 1992 at the age of ninety-four. Even then, sixty
years after his famous father had died, Theodore's life was defined by
reference to the "Illustrious Father" mentioned prominently in the
headline of his obituary.

Neither Charles nor Theodore accepted their father's belief that
working in a technology-based business was itself a form of world bet
terment; both sons gave away substantial portions of their wealth. The

enduring nature of an endowed foundation, such as the one that



\287

Charles established, shows the shortcomings of Thomas Edison's ne
glect of the fundamentals of philanthropy. His scholarship program had
run only two years, ending when he became too sick to attend to it.

At the time of his death in 1931, Edison's estate was estimated in the

press to be valued at $12 million. As the culmination of a long lifetime
in the business of invention, it is a sum that says much or little about
Edison's career and acumen, depending upon one's vantage point. Mea
sured against Edison's impecunious beginnings, it is a sizable figure, and
larger than might have been guessed when he had appeared desperate
for the research subsidies from Ford and Firestone for his rubber re

search. Still, the $12 million was not so large when Edison's loyal em
ployees measured his wealth against the total capitalization of the
industries that they credited the great man for conjuring into existence,
modestly claiming little of the resulting wealth for himself. The size of
the estate seems modest, too, when placed next to the Ford Founda
tion's endowment of $109 million and the $70 million estate for his

family that Henry Ford left at the time of his death in 1947.
The $12 million figure for the Edison estate turned out to be inflated

and subject to the crushing effects of the Depression. Time passed while
the will was processed slowly by the courts. Four years later, when the
executors gave the court the first accounting, the value of the estate was

put at $2.9 million, and reduced by 50 percent to $1.5 million by the
time the second accounting of the estate was filed two years later in
1937. Mina Edison was not affected by the disappearing inheritance.
Edison had placed Glenmont, other real estate, and stocks and bonds in
her name, providing for her financial security without placing her in the
will. This arrangement spared her from being caught in cross fire be
tween her stepchildren and children over the disposition of the estate.
Four years after Edison's death, at the age of seventy, she remarried a

seventy-three-year-old retired businessman whom she had known since
childhood. She was widowed again five years later and died in 1947 at
the age of eighty-two.

The Edison family name was not carried by succeeding generations.
Unlike Henry Ford, however, whose male heirs have handed down the



288 / 

Ford name through the present, when great-grandson William Clay
Ford Jr. is the company's executive chairman, Thomas Edison's sons did
not have children themselves. Only his daughter Madeleine Edison
Sloane did so. The Edison family name, the symbolic repository of his
fame, would not be passed on to a third generation.

Nor would the corporate name Thomas A. Edison, Inc., survive. In

1956, Charles Edison arranged for a merger with the larger McGraw
Electric Company, based in Chicago. Just as in the nineteenth century
Edison Electric had had to share the marquee, becoming Edison Gen
eral Electric before "Edison" was dropped completely, this time the
newly merged entity was renamed McGraw-Edison. The company sold
fuses, home appliances, test instruments, and equipment for generating
plants. Once again the value of the Edison name on the tag sank with
out the presence of the inventor himself to remind customers of his om

niscient oversight. In 1985, McGraw-Edison was absorbed into Cooper
Industries, an industrial conglomerate based in Houston.

Without an eponymous company selling new versions of Edison's in
ventions, his fame would be subject to the normal wear and tear from
the passage of time. It is not a little surprising how durable it has proven
to be. One measure is a poll of Chinese who were asked in 1998 to list
the best-known Americans: Ahead of Mark Twain, number four, and
Albert Einstein, number three, and even ahead of Michael Jordan, num
ber two, was Thomas Alva Edison.

In the history of modern invention, Edison fortuitously lived at just
the right time, close enough to the present to be associated with the ori
gins of the modern entertainment business and also the basic electrical
infrastructure needed for just about everything, yet not too late to be
able to get away with claiming sole authorship of the inventions pro
duced in close collaboration with a large but publicly invisible technical
staff. Today, the proliferation of technical wonders and the anonymity of
the worker bees in corporate labs who produced them prevent the emer
gence of any single individual engineer who could rival Edison. Shunpei
Yamazaki, currently affiliated with Japan's Semiconductor Energy Labo
ratory, has a long way to go before his name is recognized as readily in



\289

America as Edison's, but Yamazaki now has more than 1,560 patents is
sued in the United States. We rely upon the microprocessor, the personal
computer, the cell phone, and the iPod without even a faint idea of who
should be credited for bringing the accoutrements of modern life into ex
istence. Edison, however, made sure that no one would be confused
about whom to credit for the inventions that came out of his lab.

Edison's fame acquired an indestructible shine because he worked in
technical areas that the public sensed were going to shape that historical
moment. This was not the case in the earliest portion of his inventing
career, when he was known only among telegraph-equipment special
ists. But once he chanced upon the phonograph and, overnight, the
press anointed him the Wizard of Menlo Park, he occupied a space dif
ferent from everywhere else: He, and anyone working for him, were
perceived as standing at the very outer edge of the present, where it
abuts the future. When a young John Lawson sought a position at Edi
son's lab and wrote in 1879 that he was "willing to do anything, dirty
work-become anything, almost a slave, only give me a chance," he
spoke with a fervency familiar to applicants knocking today on the
door of the hot tech company du jour. In the age of the computer, differ
ent companies at different times-for example, Apple in the early
1980s, Microsoft in the early 1990s, Google in the first decade of the
twenty-first century-inherited the temporary aura that once hovered
over Edison's Menlo Park laboratory, attracting young talents who ap
plied in impossibly large numbers, all seeking a role in the creation of
the zeitgeist (and, like John Ott, at the same time open to a chance to
become wealthy). The lucky ones got inside (Lawson got a position and
worked on electric light).

Menlo Park became the iconic site for American ingenuity, but it was a

highly burnished image that floated free of the actual place. Edison did not
stay in the actual Menlo Park for very long-only four years after the
phonograph was invented in 1877, he moved to New York City to be close
to the work on the electric light system and would never return. When he
built the new, far larger laboratory complex in Orange, New Jersey, he still
was seen by the public as a permanent resident of the imaginary Menlo



290 / 

Park, the place where the invention factory seemed capable of mastering
anything. It was an image that popular culture did not want to relinquish
because it perfectly embodied the nation's idealized image of itself.

Edison's work was not merely his principal preoccupation; it was the
organizing leitmotif of his entire waking existence. He also made it a
defining characteristic of his public image. He made sure the press under
stood that no one worked longer hours than he did, no one needed less
sleep than he did, no one was more passionately devoted to invention
than he was. He was a prickly person who was used to getting his own
way, insufferably opinionated and a carrier of the hateful prejudices of his
day. Still, the reader who sees that Edison could neither enjoy his celebrity
nor shed it may be inclined to view Edison more sympathetically. No dif
ferent from most mortals, Edison was a creature of habit, and he stuck to
the routines that seemed to have served him so well as a young inventor.

After the phonograph and electric light, his inventive efforts across five
decades produced one claim to a major success, movies-a claim con
tested by others-as well as minor hits in other fields and some major
misses. For all his accomplishments, Edison failed to invent a way to free
himself from unrealistic expectations produced by his own past.

For more than half a century, Edison enjoyed and endured fame. His
two wives and six children would also have to contend with the compli
cations that inevitably come when an individual is no longer able to keep
private life separate from public, no longer able to keep strangers from
presuming intimate ties. Edison did not spare much time to reflect aloud

upon how celebrity had shaped the course of his life for good or for ill.
He gave no indication whether over time he lost the ability to distinguish
the exaggerated public image of the Wizard from the one that he saw in
the mirror. One exception, when Edison actually referred at least indi
rectly to his own celebrity, occurred late in his life. One of his employees
recalled walking past him one day as the inventor stepped briskly be
tween buildings at the lab. He cheerfully greeted his employer: "Morn
ing, Mr. Edison." Edison gave him a glance, raised his finger to show a
major pronouncement would follow, and said, "The world's greatest in
ventor, world's greatest damn fool," then hurried on.





The following abbreviations are used in the notes:
ENHS Edison National Historic Site, West Orange, New Jersey
HFM & GVRC Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village Research Center,

Dearborn, Michigan. All box references are for the Edison Papers,
Accession #1630.
New York Daily Graphic
New York Herald
New York Sun
New York Times
New York World

NYDG
NYH
NYS
NYT
NYW
PTAE

TAE
PTAED

The Papers of Thomas Alva Edison (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni
versity Press, 1989-)
Vol. 1: Reese V. Jenkins, Leonard S. Reich, Paul B. Israel, Toby
Appel, Andrew J. Butrica, Robert A. Rosenberg, Keith A. Nier,
Melodie Andrews, and Thomas E. Jeffrey, eds., The Making of an
Inventor, February 1847-June 1873
Vol. 2: Robert A. Rosenberg, Paul B. Israel, Keith A. Nier, and
Melodie Andrews, eds., From Workshop to Laboratory, June
1873-March 1876
Vol. 3: Robert A. Rosenberg, Paul B. Israel, Keith A. Nier, and
Martha J. King, eds., Menlo Park: The Early Years, April 1876-De
cember 1877
Vol. 4: Paul B. Israel, Keith A. Nier, and Louis Carlat, eds., The
Wizard ofMenlo Park, 1876
Vol. 5: Paul B. Israel, Louis Carlat, David Hochfelder, and Keith A.
Nier, eds., Research to Development at Menlo Park, January
1879-March 1881
Thomas Alva Edison
The Papers of Thomas Alva Edison (digital edition). The home
page for the Digital Edition is http://edison.rutgers.edu. Individual

291



292 / 

documents may be retrieved using the form at http://edison.rutgers.
edu/singldoc.htm.

TAEPM Thomas A. Edison Papers: A Selective Microfilm Edition

The following works are cited by short title in more than one chapter:
Conot, Streak of Luck: Robert Conot, A Streak of Luck (New York: Seaview

Books, 1979).
Dyer and Martin, Edison: Frank L. Dyer and Thomas C. Martin, with William

Meadowcroft, Edison: His Life and Inventions (New York: Harper &
Brothers, 1910, rev. ed. 1929).

Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light: Robert Friedel and Paul Israel, Edi
son's Electric Light: Biography of an Invention (New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press, 1986).

Israel, Edison: Paul Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1998).

Jehl, Reminiscences: Francis Jehl, Reminiscences of Menlo Park (Dearborn,
Mich.: Edison Institute, 1939). 3v.

Josephson, Edison: Matthew Josephson, Edison: A Biography (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1959).

Nerney, Edison: Mary Childs Nerney, Thomas A. Edison: A Modern
Olympian (New York: Harrison Smith and Robert Haas, 1934).

Tate, Edison's Open Door: Alfred O. Tate, Edison's Open Door (New York:
E. F. Dutton, 1938).

INTRODUCTION

page 1: stood five foot nine: "The Phonograph, Etc.," Daily Evening Traveler,
23 May 1878, PTAED, SM029106a.

page 1: first celebrities in American history: Richard Schickel, Intimate
Strangers: The Culture of Celebrity (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1985).
Schiekel assumes that the phenomenon of celebrity did not begin until the
early twentieth century. He excludes Edison from his survey.

page 2: Other nineteenth-century figures: Leo Braudy points out that "after the
Civil War, no president until Theodore Roosevelt could compete in name
and face recognition with men such as Barnum, Mark Twain, and Thomas
A. Edison." Leo Braudy, The Frenzy of Renown: Fame and Its History
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 498.

page 2: an envelope mailed: Wilson Drug Company to TAE, 12 April 1911,
ENHS. It was mailed on a bet-the envelope lacked a letter inside-and
reached Edison nineteen days later.

page 3: inspiring essayists to expect: "Phonograph," Brooklyn Eagle, 26 Feb
ruary 1878, PTAED, MBSB10385X.

page 3: one humorist suggested: "Edisonia," NYDG, 9 May 1878, PTAED,
MBSB10590X.

page 3: the two previous generations: PTAE, 1:3-6, 19n2; Josephson, Edi
son,1-3.



\293

page 4: loss of hearing: Edison attributed his hearing loss to an incident when he
was working on the Grand Trunk Railroad. In his telling, many years later,
he said he been standing below the door of a freight car with arms full with
newspapers, unable to get himself up and in, when a conductor who was
standing inside lifted him up-by his ears-to help him board. Edison
said, "I felt something snap inside my head, and my deafness started from
that time and has ever since progressed." Dyer and Martin, Edison, 37.

page 4: he persuaded his mother: TAE reminiscence, "Book No. l," 11 Septem
ber 1908, PTAE, 1:629. Unlike the carefully polished tales told of his
childhood in hagiographies, the fragments of oral history that were tran
scribed in 1908 contain enough rough edges to possess verisimilitude.

page 4: Edison expanded into newspaper publishing: PTAE, 1:25-26. TAE
reminiscence, "Book No. l," PTAE, 1:629. The British traveler was Robert
Stephenson, a civil engineer, who, with his father, George Stephenson,
were one of the most famous pair of engineers in Victorian England. I could
not confirm that the Times ever mentioned Edison's newspaper as Edison
believed it had. The incident occurred years before Edison maintained

scrapbooks of clippings, and I was unable to find any story resembling this
in Palmer's Index to the Times.

page 5: When a bottle of phosphorus: PTAE, 1:8; Dyer and Martin, Edi
son,37.

page 5: Edison fell into the good graces: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1,"
PTAE, 1:631. When MacKenzie got back in touch with Edison many years
later, in 1877, he mentioned that his son Jimmy was now almost as tall as
his father and had been working as assistant lineman on the railroad.
James MacKenzie to TAE, 18 September 1877, PTAED, D7719ZBX. In
his reply, Edison recalled that "Jimmy was only 2V2 feet high when I used
to plague him," and signed his note with atypical warmth as "Your old
friend." TAE to James MacKenzie, 21 September 1877, PTAED,
LB001291. MacKenzie became one of Edison's Menlo Park employees.

page 5: role was anything but heroic: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1," PTAE,
1 :631. For a discussion of the claim that Edison's inattention in this inci
dent resulted in the loss of lives, a claim for which there is no documentary
evidence, see PTAE, 1 :671-672.

page 6: renewed acquaintance: Ezra Gilliland was one friend whom Edison
made when the two worked together in Adrian, Michigan. The two later
roomed together, along with two actors, in Cincinnati. Gilliland helped
Edison keep his skills sharp by sending plays over the wire; presumably,
these sessions explain the recurring phrase in Edison's laboratory note
books from the opening of Richard III: "Now is the winter of our discon
tent ...

" PTAE, 1:16, 1:22n45. The two men's careers led in different
directions for a number of years, but Gilliland would later become a key
business associate and very close personal friend of Edison's.

page 6: In a rare surviving letter: TAE [to family], Spring 1866 [conjectured],
PTAE,1:28.



294 / 

page 7: great prowess: PTAE, 1:671. In Edison's own phrase, he was "a com
plete failure" as a sender.

page 7: He had diligently investigated: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1,"
PTAE, 1:637.

page 7: In Cincinnati in 1867: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1," PTAE, 1:637.
Edison put batteries to another use when he found his apartment overrun
with cockroaches. He pasted two strips of tinfoil across their path, at
tached wires to the strips and to a battery, and when the insect stepped
across both strips, "there was a flash of light and the cockroach went into
gas." TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1," PTAE, 1:637-638.

page 7: When he landed in Boston: "The Napoleon of Science," NYS, 10
March 1878, PTAED, SB031032b.

page 8: in exchange for half-interest: The documentary record for Edison and
his backers in 1868 is not complete, but the papers that are available sug
gest that the sums that Edison received were not large. One example: In
July 1868, he signed a contract with E. Baker Welch, signing over a half
interest in the fire-alarm telegraph for $20. TAE and E. Baker Welch, 28 July
1868. National Archives. PTAED, W100CAC. Earlier that month, Edison
had signed a contract that gave Baker a half-interest in a double transmit
ter for a down payment of only $5.50. Receipt for E. Baker Welch, 11 July
1868, PTAE, 1:70-71. When the full contract for this project was signed
by the two men the next year, Edison referred to unspecified "various sums
of money" that Baker had advanced to him, but the figure paid that day
was still a modest $40. TAE, patent assignment to E. Baker Welch, 7 April
1869, PTAED, D6901A.

page 8: Three individuals: PTAE, 1:52.
page 8: When Edison and his investor angel: George Parsons Lathrop,

"Talks with Edison," Harper's New Monthly Magazine, February 1890,
431-432.

page 9: A fellow boarder: W. E. Sharren to TAE, 31 July 1878, PTAED,
D7802ZUB.

page 9: could collect contributions: PTAE, 1:52; "The undersigned
promise ... ," notebook entry, 1 December 1868, PTAED, D6801A.

page 9: once got in trouble: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1," PTAE, 1:638.
page 9: He claimed that the deafness: Thomas A. Edison as told to Edward

Marshall, "My Deafness Helped You to Hear the Phonograph," Hearst
International/Cosmopolitan, April 1925.

page 9: better suited: Ibid.

page 10: One occasion: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 164.

CHAPTER I. 

page 14: On the eve of founding: TAE to Samuel and Nancy Edison, 30 Octo
ber 1870, PTAE, 1:212. Edison offered to send money so his father could
purchase "a good peice [sic] of property very cheap" that his father had
mentioned in a prior letter.



 \ 295

page 14: meeting the weekly payroll: TAE to George Harrington, 22 July 1871
[conjectured], PTAED, D7103L. How pinched Edison really was is hard
to say. Two days later, he sent his father $300 for an investment in a Port
Huron liquor store that his father was interested in. TAE to Samuel Edi
son, 24 July 1871, HFM & GVRC, PTAE, 1:308-309.

page 14: his hair turned white: TAE to Frank Hanaford, 17 September 1869,
PTAED, D6901H; TAE to Frank Hanaford, 26 January 1870 [conjec
tured], PTAED, D7001C.

page 14: When he and partner William Unger: Edison and Unger Summary Ac
count, 1 January 1872, PTAED, D7212C.

page 14: When R. G. Dun & Company: R. G. Dun & Co. Credit Report, July
1872, Baker Library, Harvard, PTAE, 1:472.

page 15: offered subscribers a private telegraph line: News Reporting Tele
graph Company, "An American Idea," advertising circular, October 1871
[conjectured], PTAED, SB178B1.

page 15: daughter of a lawyer: PTAE, 1:385n5.
page 15: Among the young women: J. B. McClure, Edison and His Inventions

(Chicago: Rhodes & McClure, 1879),67.
page 16: a strikingly similar account: "Thomas A. Edison: Inventor of Electric

Light and Phonograph," Christian Herald & Signs of Our Times, 25 July
1888, PTAED, SC88058A. Here is the alternative account:

She was seated, working; he was standing behind her quietly.
"Mr. Edison," she said, swinging around suddenly, "I can always
tell when you are behind me or near me."

"How do you account for that?"
"I don't know, I am sure," she answered, "but I seem to feel

when you are near me."
"Miss Stillwell," said Edison, "I've been thinking consider

able of you of late, and if you are willing to have me, I'd like to
marry you."

" You astonish me," she protested, "1-1 never-. "
"I know you never thought I would be your wooer," inter

rupted Mr. Edison, "but think over my proposal, Miss Stillwell,
and talk it over with your mother."

It is possible that the Christian Herald account is derived wholly from
McClure's, and does not provide independent corroboration. But it does
have a few details that are not found in the version published earlier.

page 16: a telegrapher friend: McClure, Edison and His Inventions, 68. The
story's credibility is not enhanced when we observe that Edison and friend
have their encounter on an evening that was by appearances no different
from any other, yet Edison's wedding was on Christmas Day, 1871.

page 16: After the wedding and a weeklong honeymoon: PTAE, 1:385n2.
page 16: According to one source: This is the recollection of Edward Ten

Eyck Jr., who was passing along the impressions of others who were older



296 / 

than him-Mary Stillwell Edison died in 1884, when Eyck was five years
old. David Trumbull Marshall, Recollections of Edison (Boston: Christo
pher, 1931), 108.

page 16: She remembered: Jehl, Reminiscences, 511. According to Jehl, Edi
son, for his part, was pleased that his wife, and her unmarried sister Alice,
who also lived with them to provide Mary companionship during Edison's
prolonged work hours, were" amusing themselves while he was interesting
himself at the laboratory."

page 16: financially comfortable: PTAE 1:30l.
page 17: had to sell his house: PTAE 2:312.
page 17: placed the first working system: The first regular operations of a du

plex system in the United States began in March 1768, between New York
and Boston. PTAE 1:32n7.

page 17: "any damned fool ought to know": "The Napoleon of Science,"
NYS 10 March 1878, PTAED SB031032b.

page 17: He later tried, but failed: PTAE 3:280-28l.
page 18: "should be in every family": Edison & Murray, circular, n.d., PTAE

2:208.

page 18: It sold well enough: PTAE 2:207.
page 19: "You captivate my whole heart": Daniel Craig to TAE, 18 January

1871, PTAED D7110B.
page 19: The next month: Daniel Craig to TAE, 13 February 1871, PTAED,

D7110D.

page 19: This was Edison's: George Bliss to TAE, 25 September 1878, PTAED,
D7822ZBD.

page 19: pen had a sharp needle: PTAE 2:463. For a sample of the circular
produced by the pen, see PTAE 2:56l.

page 19: "There is more money": TAE to Stephen Field, 13 September 1875,
PTAED LB001023.

page 19: one year older: When cross-examined in a civil case on 12 March
1896, Batchelor said he was fifty years old, so he was at least one year, and
perhaps was two years, older than Edison. See his testimony in American
Graphophone v. U.S. Phonograph, PTAED QP001585.

page 19: had come to the United States: Israel, Edison, 86.
page 19: "We have now": Charles Batchelor to James Batchelor, 28 May 1877,

PTAED MBLB1125.
page 20: Edison's ongoing work on automatic telegraphy: TAE, notebook, PN-

75-01-05, PTAED A204; PTAE 2:375. Freed from the financial worries
that had weighed on her the year before, Mary Edison threw a masquerade
party for her husband on February 11, 1875, the occasion of his twenty
eighth birthday. PTAED SBl78, scrapbook image ll.

page 20: settled on land in Menlo Park: The proximate reason for Edison's
move to Menlo Park was a dispute he had with the municipality of
Newark. Earlier, Edison had rented factory space from a Newark landlord
on what Edison had been given to understand was a monthly basis. When



 \ 297

Edison gave notice in his third month, paid the rent he owed, and moved
to another space in Newark, he was served with a notice that he still owed
rent for nine more months on the original space. A city ordinance guaran
teed landlords one year's rent, he learned belatedly. When he recalled the
story years later, he said, "This seemed so unjust that I determined to get
out of a place that permitted such injustice." He spent several Sundays in
vestigating possible sites for a relocated lab, one of which, Menlo Park,
was suggested by his bookkeeper, whose family happened to live about a
mile away. See Dyer and Martin, Edison, 267.

page 20: It consisted of: "A Visit to Edison," Philadelphia Weekly Times, 29
April 1878, PTAED, SM029055f.

page 20: No town hall: Jehl, Reminiscences, 498.
page 20: One saloon: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 269.
page 20: The town was too small: E. C. Baker, Sir William Preece: Victorian

Engineer Extraordinary (London: Hutchinson, 1976), 162.
page 21: in New York City: Ibid., 156.
page 21: one could glimpse: "Edison's Phonograph," Newark Daily Advertiser,

3 May 1878, PTAED, MBSB10574X.
page 21: "an elongated schoolhouse": "A Visit to Edison," Philadelphia

Weekly Times, 29 April 1878, PTAED, SM029055f.
page 21: "country shoe factory": "The Phonograph Etc.," Boston Daily

Evening Traveler, 23 May 1878, PTAED, SM029128b.
page 21: At the rear: Ibid.

page 21: The first floor: "An Hour with Edison," Scientific American, 13 July
1878, PTAED, SM009042a.

page 21: A "spider web": "That Wonderful Edison," NYW, 29 March 1878,
PTAED, MBSB10463.

page 21: The twelve or so: Bernard S. Finn, "Working at Menlo Park," in Work
ing at Inventing: Thomas Edison and the Menlo Park Experience, ed.
William S. Pretzer (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), 34.

page 21: a disheveled figure: "A Marvelous Discovery," NYS, 22 February
1878, PTAED, MBSB10378.

page 22: "the fire of genius": Ibid.
page 22: Thomas Alva Edison was already: To his rivals in the telegraphy

world, he was unflatteringly described as "gray as a badger and rapidly
growing old." See "Echoes from 197," Operator, 15 June 1877,9, quoted
in PTAE, 3:289.

page 22: in Preece's diary: Baker, Sir William Preece, 162.
page 22: It was likened: "The Latest Newark Invention," reprint from Daily

Advertiser [Newark, N.J.], n. d., TAEPM, 13:960.
page 22: A sales manager: P. Mullarkey to TAE, 17 September 1875, PTAED,

D7504C. Mullarkey reported to Edison the next week, "One man yesterday
wasted three hours of my time and then pronounced it 'quite a curiosity.' I
am so tired from today's that I am hardly able to stand." P. Mullarkey to
TAE, 23 September 1875, PTAED, D7504E.



298 / 

page 22: The fault: Frederic Ireland to TAE, 26 October 1876, PTAED,
D7608N. High-tech companies in the following century would also blame
the victim, their customer. Edison's pen venture also anticipated the latter
day discovery by Hewlett-Packard that the right pricing strategy could
yield boggling profits in the printer business. HP practically gives away
ink-jet printers, in order to secure a highly profitable, perpetually renewing
succession of ink-jet-cartridge purchases. In the case of the electric pen,
Batchelor and Edison tried to experiment with prices, floating the idea in
1877 of slashing the price of a new pen and giving a bottle of ink away for
free as a sales-promotion gimmick. Charles Batchelor to Robert Gilliland,
8 May 1877, PTAED, MBLB 1113. George Bliss, the general manager of
the Electric Pen & Duplicating Press Company, scolded them for not plac
ing a high price on the ink. Bliss wielded his considerable sales and market
ing experience like a cudgel over the inexperienced Edison and Batchelor:
"The men who make the most money are those who put a first class price
on their goods & stick to it." George Bliss to TAE, 23 May 1877, PTAED,
D7711S. This was easy to say when no other products were on the market;
a year later, though, with competitive products flooding in, Bliss had to
abandon high prices and smug certainty. The newest competitive entrant
"can be made for nothing and sold for less, so the parties claim. When will
it end?" he lamented. George Bliss to TAE, 16 April 1878, PTAED,
D7822W.

page 22: American Novelty Company: PTAE, 3:193nl1.
page 23: Batchelor's "Office Door Attachment": Charles Batchelor, technical

note, 18 November 1876, PTAED, MBNOOI059.
page 23: An idea: Charles Batchelor, technical note, 8 January 1877, PTAED,

NE1695044.

page 23: American Novelty Company: The company was incorporated in No
vember 1876 but had failed by June 1877, by which time it had been re
named the Electro-Chemical Manufacturing Company and stripped of the
one business that actually had customers, that of duplicating ink. PTAE,
3:192nl0, 289.

page 23: It was while: Robert V. Bruce, Bell: Alexander Graham Bell and the
Conquest of Solitude (Boston: Little, Brown, 1973), 147.

page 23: The more famous rendering: Ibid., 181.
page 24: Bell lacked the gifts: "Sound and Electricity," NYT, 18 May 1877.
page 24: former sales agent: PTAE, 2:207.
page 24: Johnson's excitability: In January 1877, Johnson was the general

manager of the American Novelty Company and, having heard rumors
that Edison had been critical of Johnson's management of funds advanced
to him, he had written Edison that he understood that "I am a burden to
you" and offered to resign. Edward Johnson to TAE, 3 January [1877],
PTAED, D7701A. The squall passed as quickly as it had come; two days
later, the two corresponded as if it had never happened. Edward Johnson
to TAE, 5 January 1877, PTAED, D7701B.



\299

page 24: his eagerness in April 1876: Edward Johnson to TAE, 24 April 1876,
PTAED, D7601F.

page 25: "We should not be at all surprised": "The Edison Telephone," Wood
bridge Independent, 14 June 1877, PTAED, MBSBI0192X.

page 25: "Mr. Edison has been so often scoffed at": "The Motograph,"
Newark Daily Advertiser, 2 May 1877, PTAED, MBSBI0147X.

page 25: competing musical telephone: "Prof. Gray's Telephone Concert,"
NYT, 3 April 1877.

page 25: Compared to Gray's: "Prof. Edison's New Telephone," NYT, 17 July
1877.

page 25: When Johnson saw the review: Edward Johnson to TAE, 20 July 1877
[conjectured], PTAED, D7719V.

page 25: he was happy: Edward Johnson to TAE, 17 July 1877, PTAED,
D7719T.

page 25: he begged Edison: Ibid.
page 25: The New York Daily Graphic: Ibid.
page 26: On the day of the concert: Edward Johnson to Josiah Reiff, 20 July

1877, PTAED, D7719U.
page 26: now the Times was impressed: "Prof. Edison's Telephone Concert,"

NYT, 19 July 1877.
page 26: Johnson, fond of exaggeration: Edward Johnson to TAE, 20 July

1877 [conjectured], PTAED, D7719V.
page 26: The songs: "Prof. Edison's Telephone Concert," NYT, 19 July 1877.
page 26: Johnson knew: Edward Johnson to Josiah Reiff, 20 July 1877,

PTAED, D7719U.
page 26: one Joseph Hipple: Hipple's remarkable vision deserves to be repro

duced in full:

If I understand the telephone, and I think I do, because I have
read all the newspapers I could get hold of, I don't see why in a
big city like New York they shouldn't have music in every house,
the same as water and gas. All they would have to do would be to
have one room in the city and have the best musicians they could
find there, and enough of them to give all parts and perhaps some
good singers, too. Then have wires reaching to any man's house
who wanted to pay for them. When he didn't want any music he
needn't have any, because he could take the wire out of the ma
chine. This would be cheap. It wouldn't cost half as much as a
piano, and would be better music. A company could go into it; but
they should have the best musicians. They should play all the time.
I don't mean all day and all night but from about three o'clock in
the afternoon, until bedtime, say nine o'clock. [T]hey could have
relays. Of course we couldn't have such a thing here [Spruce
Mills, Iowa]. Another might get up a room with dance-music in
it for those that wanted to buy that kind and have wires, etc.



300/NoTES

Joseph Hipple, "Music On Tap," letter to editor, NYDG, 26 March 1877,
PTAED, MBSB10104X.

page 27: telegraphy remained: Laboratory notebook, 11 July 1877, PTAED,
TI2186.

page 27: He did have a vision: Ibid.

page 27: the practicality ofthe telephone: PTAE, 3:441n1.
page 28: New York Paper Barrel Company: J. L. Thomson to TAE, 10 March

1877, PTAED, D7702G.
page 28: A legacy of this work: Charles Batchelor, Journal, October 1906,

PTAED, MBJ007.
page 28: A sketch and brief caption: Laboratory notebook, 17 July 1877,

PTAED, NV12016.
page 28: A partial list: Laboratory notebook, 20 July 1877, PTAED,

NV12023.

page 29: An employee described: The account is that of Charles Clarke. Bernard
S. Finn, "Working at Menlo Park," in Working at Inventing, 42-43.

page 29: The day after: The narrative that follows is based on Batchelor's testi
mony on 12 March 1896 in American Graphophone v. U.S. Phonograph,
PTAED, QP001585 and a similar account, with a few additional details,
in his journal, October 1906, PTAED, MBJ007. The only substantive de
tail in these accounts that is demonstrably in error is Batchelor's placing
the date in November 1877, instead of the actual month, July 1877, a for
givable lapse after having listened to Edison for decades subsequent to the
event tell reporters his own garbled and conflated chronology of the
phonograph's invention.

page 30: The entries for 18 July 1877: Laboratory notebook, 18 July 1877,
PTAED, TI2196.

page 30: James Adams: Adams, a former seaman and a failed salesperson who
had tried to peddle the Inductorum, had started working at the laboratory as
a night watchman and had worked his way into the ranks of the ex
perimenters. Robert Conot characterizes him as a "hard-swearing, hard
drinking, tubercular man of considerable talent." Conot, Streak ofLuck, 72.

page 30: failed to appreciate: When Edison got back in touch with William
Preece in England in early August 1877, three months after Preece's visit to
Menlo Park, Edison spoke excitedly of the speaking version of the tele
phone, able to articulate human speech, dog barks, cricket chirps-it is
"now absolutely perfect," he claimed. TAE to William Preece, 2 August
1877, PTAED, ZOOSAB. His motive in writing Preece was to ask him to
find an agency that would market his telephones in England ("I should feel
greatly obliged"), so he put the very best face on the current state of his
telephone equipment. Yet Edison did not deem his discovery two weeks'
previous of how to record sound to be sufficiently important to mention.

page 30: Batchelor's diary: Charles Batchelor, Diary, 1877-78, PTAED,
MBJOO1.



\301

page 31: George Field: George Field to TAE, 18 July 1877, PTAED,
D7702ZAM. ENHS has no record that indicates Edison replied to Field.

page 31: Edward Johnson told: ENHS does not have a copy of the clipping,
which apparently appeared on 14 August 1877 in the Philadelphia
Record. In an interview with a reporter from the same paper the following
year, the reporter claimed that the August 1877 brief had been the first
public announcement of the phonograph. Edison requested a copy "for my
scrapbook," and the reporter reprinted the item in its brief entirety. See
"Edison 'At Home'," Philadelphia Record, 6 June 1878 [conjectured],
PTAED, MBSB10648.

page 31: By this time: Laboratory notebook, 12 August 1877, PTAED,
NS7703A. Side note: 12 August 1877 is the same date affixed erroneously
(and, I believe, intentionally) to a sketch of a cylinder phonograph actually
drawn much later and signed by Edison. See PTAE, 3:495nl.

page 31: An unidentified staff member: Untitled sheets with T. A. Edison letter
head on first page, n.d., PTAED, D7702ZEO.

page 32: The sensitivity of Edison's carbon microphone: TAE to William
Orton, 27 July 1877, PTAE, 3:469.

page 32: In September: TAE to Franklin Badger, 17 September 1877, PTAED,
LB001285.

page 32: he wrote his father: TAE to Samuel Edison, 21 October [1877],
PTAE, 3:599-600.

page 32: Edison seems to have been disappointed: TAE to Benjamin Butler, 13
October 1877, PTAED, LB001306.

page 32: Benjamin Butler: PTAE, 3:324n6.
page 33: could at least capture: Ibid.

page 33: Butler thought: Benjamin Butler to TAE, 23 October 1877, PTAED,
D7702ZCQ.

page 33: He was infuriated by an article: "Speech Automatically Transmitted
in Shorthand by the Telegraph," Scientific American, 3 November 1877,
273. This brief article served to preview the longer article that appeared,
with illustrations, in the next issue: "Graphic Phonetics," Scientific Ameri
can, 14 November 1877, PTAED, MBSB10276X.

page 33: With Edison's permission: Edward Johnson, "Wonderful Invention:
Speech Capable of Indefinite Repetition from Automatic Records," letter to
the editor, Scientific American, 17 November 1877, PTAED, MBSB10274
(or identical copy: SM030022a). Although the cover date was 17 Novem
ber 1877, the journal was available by 6 November 1877, the same date it
was reprinted in the New York Sun (see the following citation). PTAE,
3:617nl.

page 34: The New York Sun: "Echoes from Dead Voices," NYS, 6 November
1877, PTAED, MBSB10269X.

page 34: The New York Times: It is striking how the disparagement of women
seems to have been endlessly amusing to male writers, and presumably their



302/NoTES

male readers, in 1877. "Bottled sermons" would not displace the sermons
delivered in person by clergy because "in no other way can a weekly
opportunity be afforded to ladies for mutual bonnet inspections." "The
Phonograph," NYT, 7 November 1877.

page 34: To the English Mechanic: "Edison's Phonograph," English Mechanic,
30 November 1877, PTAED, MBSBI0290X.

page 34: Edison had shifted his experimental focus: Johnson most likely
composed his undated letter on 6 November 1877. The Menlo Park note
books show that on 1 November 1877 work continued on strips of wax paper
(PTAED, QPOOl779), but on 5 November 1877 Edison proposed using a
sheet of tinfoil to be placed on a grooved cylinder (PTAED, TI2348).

page 35: When setting down: Laboratory notebook, 5 November 1877,
PTAED, TI2348.

page 35: Edison had begun: PTAE, 1 :xliii. Edison wrote in a pocket notebook
in October 1870 that "all new inventions I will here after keep a full
record."

page 35: On a page: Laboratory notebook, 23 November 1877, PTAED,
NV17018.

page 35: conceptualized, then refined: A sketch entered on 29 November 1877,
just before Kruesi started building the first model, shows side and end
views of the design of what would, in a few days, be realized as a working
model. Laboratory notebook, 29 November 1877, PTAED, NS7703D.

page 35: On 4 December 1877: Charles Batchelor, Diary, 1877-1878, PTAED,
MBJOOL

page 35: Even the loquacious Johnson: Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter,
7 December 1877, PTAE, 3:661.

page 36: feeling quite well: Over one hundred years later, Steve Jobs borrowed
the same parlor trick when he pulled the first Macintosh computer out of a
bag and had it introduce itself on stage in January 1984: "Hello, I am
Macintosh. It sure is great to get out of that bag." See Steven Levy, In
sanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That
Changed Everything (New York: Viking, 1994), 182.

page 36: Edison was given credit: "The Talking Phonograph," Scientific Amer
ican, 22 December 1877, PTAED, MBSBI0300. In France, Leon Scott
claimed that his phonautograph anticipated Edison's phonograph, which
he criticized for not creating an intelligible visual record of human speech.
See PTAE, 4:188n3.

page 37: This was stop-the-presses news: Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter,
8 December 1877, PTAE, 3:663-667. On the same day, Edison composed
an unrelated letter to a famous figure whom he did not know, seeking
recognition. "Dear Sir," wrote Edison to Charles Darwin, "several small
green colored insects were caught by me this summer having come into my
laboratory windows at night." The bugs gave off a strong smell that re
sembled naphthalene, and if Darwin was not already aware of such an in
sect, Edison offered to mail him some specimens the following summer.



NOTEs\303

It was signed "Thomas A. Edison, Telegraph Engineer." Darwin's son
Francis politely declined the offer, explaining his father was already "at
work on different subjects." TAE to Charles Darwin, 7 December 1877,
Cambridge University Library, UK, PTAE, 3:657-658.

page 37: "I want to know you": Amos Cummings to TAE, 8 January 1878,
PTAED, D7805C.

page 37: Edison welcomed: PTAE, 4:195.
page 38: The New York World referred: "Mr. Edison's Inventions," NYW, 12

January 1878, PTAED, MBSB10327.
page 38: This was especially galling: Alexander Graham Bell to Gardiner Hub

bard, 18 March 1878, Library of Congress, Alexander Graham Bell Papers,
PTAE,4:185-186.

page 38: He recovered sufficiently: Alexander Graham Bell to Gardiner Hub
bard, n.d., American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Corporate Re
search Archives, PTAE, 4:187n2.

CHAPTER 2. THE WIZARD OF
MENLO PARK

page 39: "The Phonograph is creating": Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter,
4 January [1878], PTAE, 4:15-17.

page 39: In early January 1878: Edison's Toy Contract, 7 January 1878,
PTAED, D7932ZBF08.

page 39: To pursue opportunities: Edison Speaking Phonograph Company,
Memorandum of Agreement, 30 January 1878, PTAED, D7932ZBF01.

page 40: The investors feared: Charles Cheever to Gardiner Hubbard, 9 Febru
ary 1878, PTAE, 4:68-69.

page 40: According to a psychological profile: "Thomas A. Edison," Phreno
logical Journal 66.2 (February 1878), PTAED, MBSB10352X.

page 40: Edison wrote one of his representatives: TAE to Theodore Puskas, 12
February 1878, PTAED, Z400AF.

page 40: When Edison finally wrote to Preece: TAE to William Preece, 11 Feb
ruary 1878, PTAED, Z005AL.

page 41: A clockwork mechanism also: TAE to Alfred Mayer, 11 February
1878, PTAED, X095AA.

page 41: Listening comprehension was influenced: Ibid.
page 41: If a speaker shouted: TAE to Henry Edmunds Jr., 12 February 1878,

PTAED, X322AA.
page 41: He got the idea: PTAE, 4:89n1. The germ of the idea can be seen in

his doodling a design for a steam telephone to be used in railroad signal
ing, which he had also called an "airophone." TAE, technical note, 17 Jan
uary 1878, PTAED, NV14015.

page 41: Recitations, conversational remarks: Edward Johnson, prospectus, 18
February 1878, PTAED, D7838J1.

page 42: His show played: Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter, 27 January 1878,
PTAE,4:43-44.



304/NoTES

page 42: sent out a premature announcement: TAE to Henry Edmunds Jr., 12
February 1878, PTAED, X322AA.

page 42: To another friend: TAE to Benjamin Butler, 12 February 1878,
PTAED, X042AB.

page 43: In the early 1870s: Walter P. Phillips, Sketches Old and New (New
York: J. H. Bunnell, 1897), 184-185. This usage of "bugs" occurs in a
reminiscence, I grant. But even if it is used anachronistically here and was
not used in 1872 or 1873, when Edison was working on the quadruplex, it
was definitely used by Edison in November 1878, as we shall see in a later
chapter. The Oxford English Dictionary cites Edison's mention of a "bug"
in his phonograph as the first instance of the word's usage meaning "defect
or fault in a machine plan," but this example comes from 1889, at least
eleven years later than earlier instances of Edison's usage.

page 43: For example, Alfred Mayer: Alfred M. Mayer to TAE, 15 January
1878, PTAED, D7829C.

page 43: In early February: TAE to Clarence Blake, [9 February 1878],
PTAED, XOIIAA; Charles Cheever to Gardiner Hubbard, 9 February
1878, PTAED, X012GIAF.

page 44: Edison must have slapped: Amos Cummings to TAE, 7 February
1878, PTAED, D7805F.

page 44: Cummings was not to be denied: Amos Cummings to TAE, 14 Febru
ary 1878, PTAED, D7805L. In a postscript to his letter confirming the
date of the interview, Cummings joked, "Hope electricity is not so much a
fraud as 'newspapericity.'"

page 44: the resulting story: "A Marvelous Discovery," NYS, 22 Febru
ary 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0378. The discussion below is based on this
article.

page 45: "My wife Dearly Beloved": Laboratory notebook, Newark Shops,
1 February 1872, PTAED, NE1676031A. Edison had made the same
point again in another notebook entry: "My Wife Popsy Wopsy Can't In
vent." 14 February 1872, PTAED, NE1678055, notebook p. 56.

page 45: Mary would leave: Jehl, Reminiscences, 499.
page 45: Robert Heller: PTAE, 4:35n3. A detailed account of the Hellers' per

formance is provided in "The Mystery of Second Sight," NYS, 7 February
1878, PTAED, MBSBI0353, but the copy that was microfilmed is in poor
shape and illegible in places.

page 45: unsettled clergy: Milbourne Christopher and Maurine Christopher,
The Illustrated History ofMagic (1973; reprint, Portsmouth, N.H.: Heine
mann, 1996),212.

page 46: The evening's entertainment: "That Wonderful Edison," NYW, 29
March 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0463.

page 46: "The one thing": "The Magician of Science," NYS, 31 May 1878,
PTAED, MBSBI0632X.

page 46: Having noticed sparks: PTAE, 2:581.



\30S

page 47: the etheric force could revolutionize telegraphy: For a full discussion
of Edison's "etheric force," see Israel, Edison, 111-115.

page 47: scientists came to realize: Ibid., 115.
page 50: "I find I cannot get away": TAE to Benjamin Butler, 25 March 1878,

Library of Congress, Benjamin F. Butler Papers, PTAED X042AC.
page 50: His "telephonoscope": "The Phonograph, Etc.," Daily Evening Trav

eler, 23 May 1878, PTAED SM029106a.
page 50: When letters came pouring in: "He Is a Great Man Now," unlabeled

clipping, 24 May 1878, PTAED SM029099b.
page 50: When Vanity Fair: William S. Kimball & Co. to TAE, 25 March 1878,

PTAED D7802ZEO.
page 50: "I am very sorry": "Inventor Edison's Last," NYW, 21 March 1878,

PTAED SB031052a.
page 51: In early March: Gardiner Hubbard to Thomas Watson, 24 April 1878,

American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Corporate Research Archives,
PTAED XOI2IAR; "Inventor Edison's Last." Hubbard's letter describes the
Menlo Park lab as he saw it when he visited on 23 March 1878.

page 51: Ladies and gentlemen: "Edison, the Magician," Cincinnati Commer
cial, 1 April 1878, PTAED, SB031094a. The reporter described Edison as
"an atheist in religion, and doesn't believe in guesswork about anything."
This may well have been the last time Edison talked publicly about his
atheism; subsequently, he sensed the unspoken parameters for those in the
American public's eye, and atheism fell outside of them.

page 51: Edison complained: TAE to J. w. S. Arnold, in margin of J. W. S.
Arnold to TAE, 20 March 1878, PTAED, D7802ZDXl.

page 52: the advertising was too effective: Charles Cheever to Gardiner Hub
bard, 15 March 1878, PTAED, XOI2GIAO.

page 52: Gardiner Hubbard: Gardiner Hubbard to Uriah Painter, 2 April
1878, PTAE, 4:210-213.

page 52: Cheever was more concerned: Charles Cheever to Gardiner Hubbard,
20 March 1878, PTAED, XOI2GIAW.

page 53: he doggedly insisted: "Edison, the Magician. "

page 53: reported Edison's claim: "The Inventor of the Age," NYS 29 April
1878, PTAED, MBSBI0561.

page 53: a bright little three-year-old: "Inventor Edison's Last," NYW, 21
March 1878, PTAED SB031052a.

page 53: the phonograph as a source of humor: "Miseries of the Phonograph,"
Washington Herald, 1 April 1878, PTAED, SM029004b.

page 53: The New York Times said: "The Aerophone," NYT, 25 March 1878.
The Times also ribbed Edison for his claimed discovery of the etheric force
and the embarrassment that had followed: "He has been addicted to elec

tricity for many years, and it is not very long ago that he became notorious
for having discovered a new force that he has kept carefully concealed, ei
ther upon his person or elsewhere."



306/NoTES

page 54: One professor urged Edison: "The Inventor of the Age," NYS, 29
April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0561.

page 54: Croffut wrote of a lunch: "A Food Creator," NYDG, 1 April 1878,
PTAED, MBSBI0470X.

page 54: some listeners failed to hear: "Radio Listeners in Panic, Taking War
Drama as Fact," NYT, 31 October 1938.

page 54: some readers, and some newspapers: "They Bite," NYDG, 6 April
1878, PTAED, SB031084a.

page 55: Edison was tickled: TAE to William Croffut, 6 April 1878, PTAE,
4:223-224.

page 55: another visiting reporter: "Long-Range Chatting," Philadelphia
Times, 3 April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0493X.

page 55: Ten days after: "The Wizard of Menlo Park," NYDG, 10 April 1878,
PTAED, MBSBI0500X.

page 55: Croffut's previous attempt: "The Papa of the Phonograph," NYDG,
2 April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0472.

page 55: the Mania has broken out: George Bliss to TAE, 13 April 1878,
PTAED, D7805ZAL.

page 55: Croffut had similar news: William Croffut to TAE, 25 April 1878,
PTAED, D7805ZAR.

page 55: In a recent profile: "Papa of the Phonograph."
page 56: Six days after the publication: TAE to Uriah Painter, 16 April 1878,

PTAE,4:234.
page 56: Mrs. Andrew Coburn: Mrs. Andrew W. Coburn to TAE, 13 May

1878, PTAED, D7802ZLG.
page 56: A few weeks later: Mrs. Andrew D. Coburn to TAE, 13 July 1878,

PTAED, D7802ZSI.
page 56: Then Mr. Coburn: Andrew Coburn to Charles Batchelor, 25 July

1878, PTAED, D7802ZTQ.
page 56: separately the surgeon wrote: George Fowler to TAE, 1 September

1878, PTAED, D7802ZXQ.
page 56: Mrs. Coburn followed: Mrs. Andrew Coburn to TAE, 31 October

1878, PTAED, D7802ZZIM.
page 56: Zenas Wilber: PTAE, 4:225n3.
page 56: He said he had to borrow: Zenas Wilber to TAE, 31 March 1878,

PTAED, D7802ZFN. Robert Conot provides interesting detail about
Wilber, whom he says was an alcoholic, was chronically in need of money,
and was the person whom Edison's associates had persuaded to execute a
crude forgery in the Patent Office to protect the group's interest in the
quadruplex. See Conot, Streak of Luck, 82-83.

page 56: He had Batchelor send: Charles Batchelor, diary entry, 6 April 1878,
PTAED, MBJOOI for beginning of diary; this entry also found in PTAE,
4:225.

page 56: He had accepted an invitation: Conot, Streak of Luck, 109.



\307

page 56: Before the meeting: "The Man Who Invents," Washington Post and
Union, 19 April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0532.

page 57: The phonograph demonstration: "National Academy of Sciences,"
Washington Star, 19 April 1878, PTAED, SM005003.

page 57: Edison was set free: Conot, Streak of Luck, 82, 109.
page 57: A command performance: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.2,"

1908-1909 [conjectured], PTAE, 4:863. A contemporaneous account con
tains a direct quotation of Edison's that is opaque to a modern reader but
appears to say that Hayes did not reveal his reaction. Recounting the next
month his encounter at the White House, Edison said to a reporter: "I
scanned [Hayes's] forehead very carefully, but the letters were not there."
"The Magician of Science," NYS, 31 May 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0632X.

page 58: Edison, Batchelor, and the phonograph: "Astonished Congressmen,"
Baltimore Gazette, 20 April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0538X.

page 58: leaving Congress: "Edisonia," NYDG, 9 May 1878, PTAED,
MBSBI0590X.

page 58: Having been honored: "The Inventor of the Age," NYS, 29 April
1878, PTAED, MBSBI0561.

page 58: Beneath Edison's unassuming appearance: "A Visit to Edison,"
Philadelphia Weekly Times, 29 April 1878, PTAED, SM029055f.

CHAPTER 3. 

page 59: as a member of a class of "martyrs": The author, who signed the letter
only with "S.," heaped praise on Edison in terms that are notable for their
excess: "Gods! how an Edison towers, head and shoulders above the 'pro
fessors' assembled at the Smithsonian last week! Stand aside, examiners of
old fossils, delvers in the earth, dissectors of insects, book-learned bigots
day is dawning.... What has the Government done for the discoverer, the
originator, the inventor? Messrs. Representatives, your constituents are
asking these questions. The time must come when the king among men
will be recognized." "The Man Who Towers," Washington Post and
Union, 22 April 1878, PTAED, MBSBI0544X.

page 60: Typical was his remark: TAE to Uriah Painter, 12 March 1878, PTAE,
4:171. Here "[money]" is substituted for the slang term Edison used in the
quoted passage: "rhino."

page 60: Gardiner Hubbard lamented: Gardiner Hubbard to Thomas Watson,
24 April 1878, PTAED, X012IAR.

page 60: Edison decided to renew: "Edison's 'Ear Telescope,'" NYS, 8 June
1878, PTAED, SM029144a.

page 61: Uriah Painter: Uriah Painter to TAE, 29 April 1878, PTAED,
D7802ZJE

page 61: Edward Johnson: Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter, 15 March 1878,
PTAE,4:179.

page 61: It would turn out: PTAE, 4:253n5.



30B/NoTES

page 61: Imagining fabulous profits: Uriah Painter to TAE, 29 April 1878,
PTAED, D7802Z]E The portraits were taken not by Brady but by Levin
Handy.

page 61: no one at the Edison Speaking Phonograph Company: PTAE,
4:251n2.

page 62: a group of thirty businesspeople: "Bores of Science," Sentinel of Free
dom and Weekly Advertiser, 21 May 1878, PTAED, MBSB10609X.

page 62: A Newark paper: "A Call upon the Phonograph," Newark Daily Ad
vertiser, 3 May 1878, PTAED, MBSB10574X.

page 62: Another paper suggested: "Bores of Science."
page 62: Edison was cooperative: Thomas A. Edison, "To the Editor of the

Daily Graphic," NYDG, 16 May 1878, PTAED, SM029062a.
page 62: What the letter did not disclose: William Croffut to TAE, 10 May

1878, PTAED, D7805ZAW. That it was Croffut who proposed the letter
is my hypothesis, based on context. The Edison-Croffut exchange makes
little sense were we to assume the alternative scenario, that it was Edison
who proposed to Croffut a letter of praise, and then asked Croffut to
ghostwrite it for him.

page 63: While giving CroHut a tour: "Papa of the Phonograph."
page 63: relationship of diet to national destiny: "New York Letter," Cincin-

nati Commercial, 5 May 1878, PTAED, SM029047a.
page 64: He told a visiting reporter: Ibid.
page 64: In May, he accepted: "Magician of Science."
page 65: Before Batchelor began: "Mr. Edison in a Convent," NYW, 31 May

1878, PTAED, SM029120b.
page 65: A few weeks later: "An Evening with Edison," NYT, 4 June 1878.
page 65: One journalist described Mary: "Phonograph, Etc."
page 66: Edward Johnson pretended to confide: "Edison, the Magician."
page 66: On another occasion: "Edison's Trip and Inventions," NYS, 28 Au

gust 1878, PTAED, MBSB10858.
page 66: The "telescopophon": Edison said he hoped to have the miniature ear

trumpet released before Christmas. "Ears for the Deaf," NYDG, 5 June
1878, PTAED, SM029128a.

page 67: yet be so small: "Edison 'at Home,'" Philadelphia Record, [6 June
1878?], PTAED, MBSB10648.

page 67: Theodore Puskas: "Edison's Phonograph in Paris," NYDG, 8 June
1878, PTAED, MBSB10664X.

page 67: Puskas secured: "Edison's Trip and Inventions." Edison was im
pressed that Puskas cleared the hall "every hour and begins a new exhibi
tion, and if a man wants to stay he has to pay over again." The New York
Daily Graphic (PTAED, MBSB10664X) said that the exhibition was held
three times a day, not hourly. A brief mention in a Paris newspaper said
shows ran "four or five times a day." See untitled article from the Paris Ad
vertiser, 9 May 1878, PTAED, SM029060c. Puskas was perhaps too
zealous in his pursuit of pecuniary gain: in the opinion of Andrew White,



\309

the honorary U.S. commissioner at the exposition, Puskas was so preoccu
pied with extracting profits from the commercial exhibition that he neg
lected an opportunity to put the phonograph before a key Paris Exposition
committee that awarded prizes. PTAE, 4:408n.11.

page 67: One of Edison's associates: James Adams to Charles Batchelor, 5 July
1878, PTAED, D7802ZRK.

page 67: Typical was this brief item: "America Is Still Ahead," NYDG, 11 June
1878, PTAED, MBSB10667X. The Daily Graphic credited the item to the
Boston Post. Another example from this same story, which had originally
appeared in the Buffalo Express: "We shall have the great question re
garding the hereafter settled beyond dispute directly, for have we not Mr.
Edison?"

page 67: they were harmless: The phonograph was also the subject of good
natured teasing. Humorists said it was going to be a surrogate mother in
the nursery; a cost-saving replacement of human chaplains in the Army;
and a boon to tongue-tied lovers. See Mrs. Elizabeth S. Bladen, "Ladie's
Department," Philadelphia Times, 7 June 1878, PTAED, SB031099a;
"Army Chaplains vs. Phonographs," NYT, 2 June 1878.

page 67: letters from strangers: "Edison 'At Home.'
"

page 68: making plans to stay: John Vincent to TAE, 25 February 1878, PTAED,
D7829N. The prior correspondence that included Vincent's original invita
tion is missing; I assume that the participation of Edison's family was in
cluded in the arrangement, even though it was not made explicit here.

page 68: "all the marvels of electricity": John Vincent to TAE, 27 February
1878, PTAED, D7829N.

page 68: Vincent pressed on: John Vincent to TAE, 25 February 1878, PTAED,
D7829N.

page 68: Vincent was unmoved: John Vincent to TAE, 27 February 1878,
PTAED, D7829N.

page 68: Croffut was also proving rather pushy: William Croffut to TAE,
1 June 1878, PTAED, D7802ZNN, is Croffut's announcement of his
plans. Given how close Menlo Park was situated to New York, his claim
that he and his wife needed to stay overnight makes little sense. Edison's
reply is not extant, but its tone can be guessed by the chagrin in Croffut's
letter that followed: "Yours of yesterday is at hand. I don't know when
I've feit so much like a fool as I do this minute. It didn't seem exactly
so when I wrote you the other day, but now I feel like a self-invited
guest. It isn't my way to impose myself upon friends, but I allowed my
interest in you and my desire to gratify my wife's inclination to get the
better of my discretion." William Croffut to TAE, 8 June 1878, PTAED,
D7802Z0H.

page 68: Painter urged Edison: Uriah Painter to TAE, 12 June 1878, PTAED,
D7802Z0U.

page 69: a threat he had made: J. W. S. Arnold to TAE, 20 March 1878, ENHS,
in PTAED, D7802ZDXl.



310/NoTES

page 69: He abruptly accepted: Edison apparently made the decision in early
July. See his telegram to Professor Henry Draper, apparently sent in July
1878, PTAED, D7802ZUC.

page 69: It was Barker's inspired idea: George Barker to TAE, 12 July [1878],
PTAED, D7802ZSG.

page 69: The journal told readers: "How to Build a Working Phonograph,"
Scientific American, 20 July 1878, PTAED.

page 70: Batchelor's first reaction: Charles Batchelor to TAE, 24 July 1878,
PTAED, MBLB2003. If Edison responded, his letter or cable is not cata
loged by PTAED.

page 70: The manufacture, sale or use: Office of Edison Speaking Phonograph
Co., circular, 1 August 1878, PTAED, SB032127.

page 70: Johnson also protested: PTAE, 4:408n12.
page 70: "Investigators have rights": "The Rights of Investigators," Scientific

American, 31 August 1878, PTAED, SB032035a.
page 71: obtaining permission to ride: TAE reminiscence, "First Batch," n.d.,

PTAE,4:858.
page 71: After the eclipse: Ibid.
page 71: When the two men: TAE reminiscence, "Book No.1," PTAE, 4:857.
page 72: Edison did not fully appreciate: Ibid., 4:856.
page 72: he and his wife did not correspond: I am mindful of the old adage

"Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence," and know that, theo
retically, the two could have corresponded and the letters subsequently
lost or destroyed. Based on the documentary record, this seems most
unlikely.

page 72: Mrs. E's health is not: Stockton Griffin to TAE, 5 August 1878,
PTAED, D7802ZUQ.

page 73: Barker formally presented Edison: "Science at St. Louis," New York
Daily Herald, 24 August 1878, PTAED, SB032055c.

page 73: "The people": "Edison's Trip and Inventions."
page 73: His trip had been "bang-up": "Tom Edison Back Again," NYW, 27

August 1878, PTAED, SB032075a.
page 73: read a letter from an inventor: "Tom Edison Back Again."
page 74: He returned with lots of dazzling ideas: "Four Hours with Edison,"

NYS, 29 August 1878.
page 75: "Did you get": "Tom Edison Back Again."
page 75: It was also the very day: Laboratory notebook, 27 August 1878,

PTAED, NV16006.

CHAPTER 4. 

page 76: In 1808, Humphry Davy: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light, 7.
page 76: An experimental installation: Wolfgang Schivelbusch, Disenchanted

Night: The Industrialization of Light in the Nineteenth Century (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1988), 55.



\311

page 77: Robert Louis Stevenson: Quoted in Al Parsons, Lightning in the Sun:
A History ofFlorida Power Corporation, 1899-1974 (St. Petersburg, Fla.:
Florida Power Corporation, 1974), 33.

page 77: When an inventor: Mel Gorman, "Charles F. Brush and the First Pub
lic Electric Street Lighting System in America," Ohio Historical Quarterly,
April 1961, 133-134.

page 77: The New York Times described: "The Electric Light," NYT, 22 April
1878.

page 78: J. W. Starr: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light, 8. Friedel and
Israel point out that Starr's inventions simply were not practical. Then
again, I would add, neither were Edison's first attempts at designing a
practical bulb.

page 78: on his trip out west: Ibid., 4.
page 79: a curiously ghoulish thought: "A Great Triumph," New York Mall,

10 September 1878, PTAED, SB032119a. The original article appeared in
the New York Sun. The Mall reprinted it the same day, and it was the clip
ping from the Mall that Batchelor preserved in his scrapbook.

page 79: Mr. Edison was enraptured: Ibid. The excitement of the visitor brings
to mind Apple's Steve Jobs's storied visit to Xerox's Palo Alto Research
Center in 1979, when he glimpsed the first personal computers with soft
ware featuring Windows and guided by mice. Five years later, Apple intro
duced the Macintosh. In the view of Xerox PARC's later regretful director,
George Pake, the significance of the visit was that it convinced Jobs that
such a computer was"doable." Pake likened it to the Soviets' building of
their first atomic bomb: "They developed it very quickly once they knew it
was doable." See Douglas K. Smith and Robert C. Alexander, Fumbling
the Future: How Xerox Invented, then Ignored, the First Personal Com
puter (New York: William Morrow, 1988), 242.

page 79: "so simple": "Edison's Electric Light," NYS, 20 October 1878,
PTAED, MBSB20963.

page 80: he recorded his excitement: Laboratory pocket notebook, 1 January
1871, PTAED, NP002Al.

page 80: set a far more ambitious goal: William H. Bishop, "A Night with Edi
son," Scribner's, November 1878, 99.

page 80: "I don't care": "Mr. Edison's Use of Electricity," New York Tribune,
28 September 1878, PTAED, SB032142a.

page 81: On the following Saturday: "Edison's Newest Marvel," NYS, 16 Sep
tember 1878, PTAED, SB032123a.

page 81: He wrote Theodore Puskas: TAE to Theodore Puskas, 22 September
1878, PTAED, D7802ZZBL.

page 81: When Edison missed a meeting: Stockton Griffin to Grosvenor
Lowrey, 24 September 1878, PTAED, D7820K.

page 82: When Lowrey tried again: TAE to Grosvenor Lowrey, 26 September
1878, PTAED, D7820N.



312/NoTES

page 82: Drawing on his experience: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric
Light,23.

page 82: He had not yet succeeded: Charles Bazerman, The Languages of Edi
son's Light (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1999), 161.

page 82: He cabled George Gouraud: TAE to George Gouraud, draft of cable,
8 October 1878, PTAED, D7821G.

page 82: "panic in gas shares": George Gouraud to TAE, cable, 7 October
1878, PTAED, D7821F.

page 82: Gouraud wished: George Gouraud to TAE, 16 October 1878,
PTAED, D7802ZZFC.

page 83: The British equivalent: George Gouraud to TAE, 24 October 1878,
PTAED, D7821U.

page 83: When the New York Herald arrived: "Edison's Electric Light," NYH,
12 October 1878, PTAED, MBSB20949.

page 83: Running the sham demonstration: "Edison's New Light," NYDG, 21
October 1878, PTAED, MBSB20960.

page 83: reporter from a third newspaper: "Edison's Electric Light," NYH, 12
October 1878, PTAED, MBSB20949.

page 83: For another newspaper: "Edison's Electric Light," NYS.
page 83: The time sheets from his laboratory: PTAE, 4:567n1.
page 84: The exhibition model's best month: PTAE, 4:572n1.
page 84: netting Edison a commission: Charles Bailey to TAE, 8 October 1878,

PTAED, D7831C.
page 84: The treasurer: Charles Bailey to TAE, 8 October 1878, PTAED,

D7831C.

page 84: A couple of months later: "Two Hours at Menlo Park," NYDG,
28 December 1878, PTAED, MBSB21091.

page 84: William Vanderbilt and his friends: TAE to Theodore Puskas, 5 Octo
ber 1878, PTAE, 4:562.

page 84: At the beginning of the nineteenth century: Schivelbusch, Disen
chanted Night, 51.

page 85: It was also expensive: Thomas J. Schlereth, Victorian America: Trans-
formations in Everyday Life (New York: HarperPerennial, 1992), 114.

page 85: The New York Times: "Gas Stocks and Light," NYT, 27 October 1878.
page 85: Edison credited the gas monopoly: "Edison's Electric Light," NYS.
page 85: The Brooklyn Daily Eagle: "Revenge Is Sweet," Brooklyn Daily

Eagle, 1 December 1878, PTAED, MBSB21072X.
page 85: An "enormous abandonment": "Gas Stocks and Light," NYT, 27 Oc

tober 1878.

page 85: The previous month: Gorman, "Charles F. Brush," 135-136.
page 85: William Sharon: Charles M. Coleman, P.G. & E. of California: The

Centennial Story of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 1852-1952 (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1952),55.

page 85: The gas-industry conventioneers: "Gas Men in Council," NYT,
19 October 1878.



\313

page 86: Speakers at the gas-industry convention: Ibid.
page 86: Edison had sent Charles Batchelor: "Edison's New Light," NYDG.
page 86: One independent observer: [Albert Salomon von Rothschild] to Au-

gust Belmont, 25 October 1878, PTAED, D7821ZAW.
page 86: He blamed his reticence: Lemuel Serrell to TAE, 16 December

1878, PTAED, D7828ZFB. The phrase "than they are worth" was crossed
out in the letter, but is restored here, as Serrell left it in perfectly legible form.

page 86: Not so easily put off: George Barker to TAE, 23 October 1878,
PTAED, D7819ZAT.

page 87: had not yet signed: Barker wrote Edison on 23 October 1878, but
Edison did not sign his agreement with the company until15 November.

page 87: "Positively No Admittance": "Edison's New Light," NYDG.
page 87: Professor Barker would not be denied: George Barker to TAE, 23 Oc

tober 1878, PTAED, D7819ZAT.
page 88: In the event: George Barker to TAE, 22 November 1878, PTAED,

D7819Zq.
page 88: publicly covered for him: PTAED, 4:726n5.
page 88: privately indulged with Edison: George Barker to TAE, 22 November

1878, PTAED, D7819Zq.
page 88: The press was fascinated: "Edison's Electric Light," NYS.
page 88: Talking at such length: Edwin Fox to TAE, 20 October 1878,

PTAED, D7805ZDW.
page 88: write two volumes of bestselling memoirs: Ulysses S. Grant, Personal

Memoirs of u.s. Grant (New York: C. j. Webster, 1885-1886).
page 88: Days after he wrote this: Edwin Fox to TAE, 5 November 1878,

PTAED, D7805ZEG.
page 89: A speed record in sycophancy: "Edison's Baby," NYT, 27 October

1878. The story suggested that the two hours of struggle over being
dressed may have been masculine reaction to effeminate attire- "the dain
tiest muslin, with ruffles and furbelows, such as only a mother's fancy can
imagine."

page 89: Without being privy: George Barker to TAE, 3 November 1878,
PTAED, D7802ZZjD.

page 89: Edison had a different theory: "Two Hours at Menlo Park." The
article does not mention that he was hurt by arc lights, but only arc lights
could produce the intense light described here, and it is known from other
sources that Edison rigged up arc lights for experimental purposes in the
laboratory at this time. See Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light,
48-49.

page 90: Now claims to have solved: R. G. Dun & Co. Credit Report, 10 De
cember 1878, PTAE, 4:773.

page 90: When R. G. Dun wrote him: R. G. Dun & Co. to TAE, 4 February
1881, PTAED, D8123E.

page 90: He left negotiations: TAE to Grosvenor P. Lowrey, 3 October 1878,
PTAED, LB003390.



314/NoTES

page 90: Lowrey, in turn: Grosvenor P. Lowrey to Hamilton Twombly, 1 October
1878, PTAED, D7820ZAC. The lead investors in the Edison Electric Light
Company included Twombly (whose father-in-law was William Vanderbilt),
Tracy Edson, Norvin Green, and James Banker, associated with Western
Union; Robert Cutting Jr., a law partner of Lowrey's; and Egisto Fabbri, rep
resenting the interests of Drexel, Morgan. The incorporation papers were
filed on 16 October 1878 and are found in PTAED, QD012B0208.

page 90: On 15 November: Edison Electric Light Company and TAE, Agree
ment, 15 November 1878, PTAED, HM780053.

page 91: A few days later: Grosvenor Lowrey to TAE, 25 November 1878,
PTAED, D7820ZCA.

page 91: Lowrey again labored: Grosvenor Lowrey to TAE, 10 December
1878, PTAED, D7821ZBR.

page 91: In a matter of just a few weeks: Grosvenor Lowrey to TAE, 23 De
cember 1878, PTAED, D7820ZDI.

page 91: In his telling: "Invention by Accident," NYW, 17 November 1878,
PTAED, MBSB21019X.

page 91: "I have begun": "Two Hours at Menlo Park."
page 92: In January 1879: Calvin Goddard to TAE, 22 January 1879, PTAED,

D7920M.

page 92: Not having heard: William Croffut to TAE, 3 February 1879,
PTAED, D7920W.

page 92: note that Fox sent to Edison: Edwin Fox to TAE, 26 January 1879,
PTAED, D7920R.

page 93: Francis Upton, a twenty-six-year-old physicist: PTAE, 5:141nl.
page 93: at Princeton: Upton studied at Princeton's Green School of Science

from 1875 to 1877, becoming the first student to receive an M.S. from
Princeton. The university archives do not have information about his
thesis, or whether one was submitted.

page 93: in the Astor Library: Francis Upton to Charles Farley, 29 December
1878, PTAED, MU005.

page 93: In November 1878: Francis Upton to Charles Farley, 22 November
1878, PTAED, MU002. Accepting the offer to move to Menlo Park meant
Upton could not return to Germany to resume his postgraduate studies.
Life in Germany would have been "extremely pleasant," he wrote his
mother, but "there I would only learn how to spend money. Here I will
learn how to earn it." Francis Upton to Lucy Upton, 7 November 1878,
PTAED, MUOOl.

page 93: Upon arrival in Menlo Park: "Two Hours at Menlo Park." Edison
referred in a latter to working with "6 experimental assistants." TAE to
Theodore Puskas, 3 January 1879, PTAED, LB004079. Upton arrived on 13
or 14 December, and two weeks later was" learning how to sleep daytimes."
Francis Upton to Charles Farley, 29 December 1878, PTAED, MU005.

page 93: When a tornado: "The Electric Light," NYH, 11 December 1878,
PTAED, MBSB21048X.



\3IS

page 93: when Edison was coming to the realization: Friedel and Israel, Edi
son's Electric Light, 51.

page 94: Even when he decided: Grosvenor Lowrey to TAE, 25 January 1879,
PTAED, D7920Q.

page 94: The investors did stand by the inventor: Francis Upton to Elijah
Upton, 23 February 1879, PTAED, MU007.

page 94: At times: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 2 March 1879, PTAED,
MU008.

page 94: A few weeks later: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 23 March [1879],
PTAED, MU009.

page 94: In May: Francis Upton to TAE, 19 May 1879, PTAED, D7919ZAP.
page 95: Inexperience with the world: Francis Upton to TAE, 19 May 1879,

PTAED, D7919ZAQ. Upton sent his note with the correct figures on the
same day as he had sent the first note to Edison.

page 95: Edison made his offer: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 15 June 1879,
PTAED, MU017. In Silicon Valley in the 1990s, equity in the form of
stock options became the most important component of compensation at
technology-based start-up companies. For a good description of the "op
tions culture," see Justin Fox, "The Next Best Thing to Free Money," For
tune, 7 July 1997, 70-84.

page 95: In writing about his quandary: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 22
June 1879, PTAED, MU018.

page 95: Upton elected: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 6 July 1879, PTAED,
MU021.

page 95: He immediately felt: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 7 September
1879, PTAED, MU030.

page 95: As time passed: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 19 October 1879,
PTAED, MU031.

page 96: his laboratory colleague: Jehl, Reminiscences, 351-356.
page 96: Batchelor wrote: Charles Batchelor, laboratory notebook, 22 October

1879, PTAED, N052105.
page 96: He did tell the New York Times: "Edison's Electric Light," NYT, 21

October 1879.

page 97: "He is always sanguine": Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 2 November
1879, PTAED, MU033.

page 97: "Continual trouble": Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 9 November
1879, PTAED, MU034.

page 97: in mid-November: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 22 November
1879, PTAED, MU036.

page 97: Upton, however, did not have to wait: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton,
30 November 1879, PTAED, MU037.



316/NoTES

CHAPTER 5. 

page 98: Occasionally, on a Saturday night: Jehl, Reminiscences, 503.
page 98: one New York paper: "Edison's Life," NYH, 10 January 1880,

PTAED, MBSB21414X.
page 98: French actress and singer: On the occasion of the opening in Decem

ber 2005 of an exhibition, Sarah Bernhardt: The Art of High Drama, at the
Jewish Museum in New York, the New York Times art critic Edward
Rothstein said contemporaneous accounts of Bernhardt's voice described
it as being "almost animalistic." See" A Celebrity Extraordinaire Who Ri
valed Eiffel Tower," NYT, 2 December 2005.

page 99: Bernhardt's original plan: Sarah Bernhardt, My Double Life: The
Memoirs of Sarah Bernhardt (Albany: State University of New York,
1999), 261-264; Dyer and Martin, Edison, 737.

page 100: By that time: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 7 December 1879,
PTAED, MU038. Lizzie Upton came up with the idea of decorating the
lamps with ribbons and flowers. Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 21 De
cember 1879, PTAED, MU040.

page 100: was given exclusive access: Jehl, Reminiscences, 380. Fox knew
he would be able to paint a much better "pen picture" if he could gain ac
cess to the laboratory and witness events for himself rather than rely upon
someone else's account obtained through an interview. In a letter he had
sent Edison a year earlier, he wrote, "A man may sit down and open out
words by the hour descriptive, say, if you please of the beauty of some pic
turesque landscape, yet unless his eyes have feasted upon the glory he de
scribes his words fall flat and aimless." Edwin Fox to TAE, 5 November
1878, PTAED, D7805ZEG.

page 101: On Sunday: "Edison's Light," NYH, 28 December 1879, PTAED,
MBSB21395X.

page 101: catching Edison by surprise: Upton assumed that Fox had deliber
ately broken his agreement with Edison, selling out "at a good price." Fran
cis Upton to Elijah Upton, 21 December 1879, PTAED, MU040; Jehl's
later account told a different story: that the Herald had been given clear
ance by someone at the laboratory, but not by Edison. Jehl repeatedly refers
to Edwin Fox as "Marshall Fox." Jehl, Reminiscences, 380-381.

page 101: A New York Herald editorial: "Edison's Eureka-the Electric Light
at Last," NYH, 21 December 1879, PTAED, MBSB21378X.

page 101: William Sawyer: "Edison's Electric Light," NYU;: 24 December
1879, PTAED, QD012G4172.

page 101: He dared Edison: William Sawyer, "Electrician Sawyer's Challenge
to Electrician Edison," NYS, 22 December 1879, PTAED, CC014016.

page 101: Edison returned the challenge: "Edison's Horseshoe Light," NYS, 23
December 1879, PTAED, MBSB21390.

page 101: the publicity: "Edison's Electric Light."
page 1 02: At that time, Edison bragged: "Edison's Lamp Yet Burning," NYS,

24 December 1879, PTAED, MBSB21392X.



\317

page 102: He responded with a public promise: "Edison's Horseshoe Light."
page 102: On 26 December: Egisto Fabbri to TAE, 26 December 1879,

PTAED, D7920ZBO.
page 102: He did not openly defy: "Edison's Light," NYH, 28 December 1879,

PTAED, MBSB21395X.
page 102: The next night: [article title omitted], NYH, 29 December 1879,

cited in Jehl, Reminiscences, 411.
page 102: more arrived the next night: "Electricity and Gas," NYH, 30 De

cember 1879, PTAED, MBSB21401X.
page 103: Two and then four more: "A Night with Edison," NYH, 31 December

1879, PTAED, MBSB21402b. Sarah Jordan was Mary Edison's stepsister.
page 103: Edison Electric Light Company: Grosvenor Lowrey to TAE, 13 No

vember 1879, PTAED, D7920ZBI.
page 103: Company stock: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton, 28 December 1879,

PTAED, MU041.
page 103: The spike in prices: "Edison and the Skeptics," NYT, 4 January 1880.
page 103: On New Year's Eve: "Edison's Great Work," NYH, 1 January 1880,

PTAED, MBSB21405a.
page 104: When he appeared: "Crowding Edison," NYH, 2 January 1880,

PTAED, MBSB21407a.
page 104: lab assistants were convinced: PTAE, 5:540.
page 104: the printed condemnation: "Crowding Edison."
page 104: Their vigilance was needed: TAE reminiscence, "Second Batch,"

n.d., PTAE, 5:1025-1026.
page 104: the New York Tribune: "A Malicious Visitor," New York Tribune,

2January 1880, PTAED, MBSB21407b.
page 105: What a happy man: "The Great Edison Scare,

" Journal of Gas
Lighting, 20 January 1880, PTAED, MBSB21440X. Reprinted from the
Saturday Review published in England on 10 January 1880.

page 105: The price of Edison Electric Light Company stock: "Mr. Edison and
His Critics," NYS, 24 January 1880, PTAED, MBSB21450X.

page 105: At this moment Edison: "The Coming Light," Philadelphia Record,
12 February 1880, PTAED, SM014034.

page 105: Edward Johnson sighed: Edward Johnson to Uriah Painter, 10 De-
cember 1880, PTAE, 5:492-493n5.

page 106: Edison took what solace he could: "The Coming Light."
page 106: A professional snoop: Jehl, Reminiscences, 700-703.
page 106: The company directors were willing: Ibid., 558-559, 562-563.
page 107: "Be thou to me": Grosvenor Lowrey to Kate Armour, n.d. [May

1880], HFM & GVRC, Box 10, Folder 34.
page 107: Lowrey also told his beloved: Grosvenor Lowrey to Kate Armour

[written in Menlo Park, New Jersey], 30 April 1880, HFM & GVRC, Box
10, Folder 34.

page 107: When Lowrey showed Edison: Grosvenor Lowrey to Kate Armour,
14 March 1880, HFM & GVRC, Box 10, Folder 34.



318/NoTES

page 107: A man who did odd jobs: David Trumbull Marshall, Recollections
of Edison (Boston: Christopher, 1931), 26.

page 108: he first sketched out: "Edison at Home," Denver Tribune, 25 April
1880, PTAED, SM015018a.

page 108: It was the picture: Marshall, Recollections of Edison, 17-18.
page 109: "The smell was terrific": Dyer and Martin, Edison, 634-635.
page 109: In early June: Grosvenor Lowrey to Kate Armour, 5 June 1880,

HFM & GVRC, Box 10, Folder 34.
page 109: The first bamboo hunter: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 636-637.
page 110: Edison placed the blame: TAE to Vesey Butler, 4 November 1880,

PTAED, LB006521.
page 110: another emissary, William Moore, Dyer and Martin, Edison, 300-301.

Before departing from San Francisco in October, Moore visited the Colum
bia and wrote back to Edison that half of the bulbs had burned out, leav

ing the captain rather desperate for replacements. William Moore to TAE,
17 October 1880, PTAED, D8020ZHY.

page 110: John Branner: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 301-302. Dyer and Martin
misspell Branner's name as "Brauner." Many decades later, Branner served
as president of Stanford University, from 1913 to 1915. Edison funded
another bamboo hunter, Frank McGowan, who was sent to Brazil in
September 1887 and returned a year and a half later with bamboo and
incredible stories of his inland travels. See "Frank McGowan's Journey
Through South American Wilds," NYS, 2 May 1889, PTAED, MBSB2457.

page 110: Edison designated Menlo Park itself: Francis Upton to Elijah Upton,
9 May 1880, PTAED, MU048.

page 110: The work was well advanced: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric
Light, 179.

page 111: In October, Edwin Fox: Edwin Fox to TAE, 22 October 1880,
PTAED, D8020ZHZ.

page 111: As far as Edison was concerned: "Electric Light," NYH, 18 Novem
ber 1880.

page 111: installed a working exhibition: "Lights for a Great City," NYT, 21
December 1880.

page 111: Edison must have been upset: George Barker to TAE, 26 November
1880, PTAED, D8020ZJC.

page 111: cartoons that turned: Cartoon captioned "The Decadence of the Wiz
ard of Menlo Park," General Electric Corporation, 1880, cited in David E.
Nye, The Invented Self: An Anti-Biography from Documents of Thomas A.
Edison (Odense, Denmark: Odense University Press, 1983), 116-117.

page 112: The Brush Electric Light Company: "The Electric Light," New York
Post, 21 December 1880, PTAED, MBSB21560X; "Rival Electric Lights,"
New York Star, 21 December 1880, PTAED, MBSB21559X.

page 112: The debut of Brush lighting: "Lights for a Great City"; "Broadway
Illuminated," NYH, 21 December 1880; "Electric Light," New York Post.

page 113: Department of Public Works tried: "Electric Light," New York Post.



\319

page 113: Edison's consent: Lowrey had Edison handwrite the invitation,
which was a very straightforward invitation to see "an exhibition of Elec
tric Lighting," without reference to a special feast. Letterpress invitation to
exhibition of lighting at Menlo Park, 18 December 1880, HFM & GVRC,
Box 47, Folder 47-40,

page 114: All were alight: "The Aldermen Visit Edison," NYI: 21 Decem-
ber 1880.

page 114: Two years before: Jehl, Reminiscences, 690-693.
page 114: one reporter described Edison: "Rival Electric Lights."
page 115: "That's the last": "The Wizard of Menlo Park," NYH, 21 Decem-

ber 1880.

page 115: It fell to Lowrey: Jehl, Reminiscences, 781-782.
page 115: Edison did not know: "The Aldermen Visit Edison."

page 116: The guests then followed: "Aldermen at Menlo Park," New York
Truth, 21 December 1880, PTAED, MBSB21557X.

page 116: the aldermen would not back down: "Lightning over Snow," NYH,
20 January 1881, PTAED, MBSB21573.

page 116: Brush Electric had not had to pay: "The Aldermen and the Electric

Light," NYH, 21 January 1881, PTAED, MBSB21571X.
page 116: He also made noises: Charles Bazerman, The Languages ofEdison's

Light (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1999),226.
page 116: His representatives: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light, 207.
page 116: In the meantime: Ibid., 192-193.
page 117: on Fifth Avenue: Jehl, Reminiscences, 924.
page 117: With the installation of a gas-powered power plant: Edward John-

son to Uriah Painter, 9 February 1881, PTAE, 5:983-984.
page 117: In early February 1881: Ibid.
page 117: At the end of the month: Jehl, Reminiscences, 926.
page 117: make himself available: Samuel Insull, The Memoirs ofSamuel InsulI:

An Autobiography, ed. Larry Plachno (Polo, Ill.: Transportation Trails,
1992), 32.

page 118: he would do wicked impressions: Jehl, Reminiscences, 996.
page 118: In its first year: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 361.
page 118: The Menlo Park laboratory: Jehl, Reminiscences, 862.

CHAPTER 6. 
page 119: Only "the very rich": James D. McCabe, New York by Sunlight and

Gaslight (Philadelphia: Douglass Bros.; repro by Greenwich House, 1882;
1984 repr.), 62-63.

page 119: Edison had drawn up blueprints: Commerford Martin, Forty Years
of Edison Service, 1882-1922 (New York: New York Edison Press,
1922),34.

page 119: When the directors: TAE to George Gouraud, 7 March 1881,
PTAED, LB008024. This letter book copy is exceedingly difficult to read.
A typeset and annotated copy is provided in PTAE, 5:996-997.



320 / 

page 119: Etna Iron Works: Roach's property was located on Goerck Street, a
street that later disappeared in the course of urban renewal.

page 120: The two partners decided: Jehl, Reminiscences, 744.
page 120: One reporter marveled: "The Doom of Gas," St. Louis Post-Dispatch,

1 May 1882, PTAED, MBSB52192.
page 121: The family doctor: Leslie D. Ward to TAE, 18 January 1882,

PTAED, D8214C.
page 121: Often he napped on the premises: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 400.
page 121: He insisted on custom building: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric

Light, 173.
page 121: Edison had originally planned: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 385.
page 121: H. O. Thompson, the city's commissioner of public works: Ibid., 393.
page 122: They read in the newspaper: "Killed by an Electric Shock," NYT, 11

August 1881, reprinted from the Buffalo Commercial Advertiser, 8 August
1881.

page 122: In England: Untitled article in Morning Advertiser, 10 January 1882,
PTAED, MBSB51975.

page 122: a German proposed building: "A Chair for Criminals," NYT, 28
July 1881.

page 122: Edison's company: "Underground Wires," Bulletin of the Edison
Electric Light Company, no. 4 (24 February 1882), 9.

page 122: fibrillation follows: Today, defibrillators apply a jolt of electric cur
rent to the chest to restart the heart's regular beating pattern, but it is di
rect current that supplies the corrective shock.

page 123: When the Pearl Street station: Jehl, Reminiscences, 1059-1061.
page 123: The police officers present: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 408-409.
page 123: the newspapers had received word: Jehl, Reminiscences, 1059-1061.
page 123: The president of Edison Electric: "Horses Shocked," NYT, 25 Au-

gust 1882.

page 123: Edison was privately telling Charles Clarke: Jehl, Reminiscences,
1059-1061. Faulty Edison Electric lines beneath the street knocked horses
down in an incident a few years later. Here, too, "people who saw the af
fair thought it was very funny. "See "Horses Thrown Down," NYT, 2 June
1889. The problem of street-level electrical shocks is not merely a curiosity
of that early era. On 16 January 2004, a young woman, Jodie Lane, was
electrocuted while walking her dogs in the East Village. The dogs stepped
on a metal plate that was electrified by stray current; they survived, but
Lane did not. Regrettably, Major Eaton's inclination to deny, deny, deny
lives on in his latter-day successors in New York City. Consolidated Edison
was less than forthcoming about the origins of the accident, and reporters
uncovered 539 complaints of electrical jolts delivered by the streets of New
York in the five years preceding Lane's death, only a small portion of
which had been reported to the city authorities. "Con Ed's Shocking Plea
for Mercy," New York Daily News, 13 March 2004. Lane's family reached



\321

a $7.2 million settlement with Con Ed, which included $1 million that
funded a scholarship in the victim's name at Columbia University. "Utility
Will Pay $7.2 Million in Electrocution," NYT, 24 November 2004.

page 124: The Bulletin: "Danger from Gas," Bulletin of the Edison Electric
Light Company, no. 6 (27 March 1882), PTAED, CB006:4-5; "Danger
from Gas," Bulletin of the Edison Electric Light Company, no. 7 (17 April
1882): 9-10.

page 124: the simple physical fact: "Light Ahead," Los Angeles Times, 12 Feb
ruary 1882.

page 124: The gas industry: Untitled article, Morning Advertiser, 10 January
1882, PTAED, MBSB51975.

page 124: An electric corset: "A New Use of Electricity," NYT, 12 January 1882.
page 124: The prospective advantages: Owen Gill to TAE, 27 January 1881,

PTAED, D8120X.
page 125: Such installations: TAE to Owen Gill, 29 January 1881, PTAED,

LB006874.

page 125: One New York company: "Hinds, Ketcham & Co., New York," Edi
son Electric Light Company Bulletin (24 February 1882), PTAED, CB004:2.

page 125: The Blue Mountain House: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 446.
page 125: Brush was selling: "The Electric Light," New York Post, 1 December

1881, PTAED, MBSB41778.
page 126: In the three months: "Edison's Electric Light," NYT, 1 March 1881.
page 126: The laying of the mains: "The Electric Light," New York Post.
page 126: a new possibility had appeared: Peter Tocco, "The Night They

Turned the Lights on in Wabash," Indiana Magazine of History 95 (De
cember 1999): 352.

page 127: In San Jose: Charles M. Coleman, P.G. & E. of California: The Cen
tennial Story of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 1852-1952 (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1952), 72-74. The public subscription raised $3,456,
but construction costs turned out to be more than expected and the tower
was sold in 1882 to the San Jose Brush Electric Company. See "The Day
the Tower Fell," San Jose Mercury News, 18 September 1884.

page 127: Wild fowl crashed: "The Famous Old Electric Tower," San Jose
Mercury News, 14 March 1965.

page 127: In Detroit: Raymond Miller, Kilowatts at Work: A History of the
Detroit Edison Company (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1984), 33.

page 127: A British observer: "The Tower System of Lighting Towns," Electri
cal Engineer, February 1885,129.

page 127: Wabash, the pioneer: Tocco, "The Night They Turned the Lights on
in Wabash," 352.

page 127: shall search the roads: "Light Ahead," Los Angeles Times, 12 Febru
ary1882.

page 127: When a history of Detroit: George B. Catlin, The Story of Detroit
(Detroit: Detroit News, 1923), 608.



322/NoTES

page 128: The only way Edison Electric: E. A. Mills, "The Development of
Electric Sign Lighting," Transactions of the Illuminating Engineering Soci
ety 15:6 (30 August 1920): 370-371.

page 128: Edison was able to test: Friedel and Israel, Edison's Electric Light,
217-218.

page 128: Edison deployed: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 385-386.
page 128: He also learned: "The Electric Light in Houses," Harper's Weekly,

24 June 1882, 394.
page 129: In May 1882: "The Doom of Gas," St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 1 May

1882, PTAED, MBSB52192.
page 129: Edison also boasted: Ibid.

page 129: William Vanderbilt was the first: Dyer and Martin, Edison,
373-374.

page 130: The unhappy ending: "Doom of Gas."
page 130: J. P. Morgan wanted Edison: Herbert L. Satterlee, J. Pierpoint Mor

gan: An Intimate Portrait (New York: Macmillan, 1939),207-208. The en
gineer's technical expertise was needed to make repairs. Problems began on
the very first day of operation, when a defective aperture threw off a shower
of sparks. See Sherburne Eaton to TAE, 8 June 1882, PTAED, D8226S.

page 131: The generating plant: Satterlee, J. Pierpoint Morgan, 208.
page 131: Morgan prized: Ibid., 212-215.
page 132: In Appleton, Wisconsin: Forrest McDonald, Let There Be Light: The

Electric Utility Industry in Wisconsin, 1881-1955 (Madison, Wis.: Ameri
can History Research Center, 1957), 35-36.

page 132: It could have been ready: Ibid., 15.
page 133: not all portions: "Edison's Illuminators," NYH, 5 September 1882,

PTAED, SM016006b.
page 133: On the afternoon of 4 September 1882: Friedel and Israel, Edison's

Electric Light, 222. The Herald places Edison in the Pearl Street work
shop, not in Morgan's office, when the power was turned on. "Edison's 11-
luminators," NYH, 5 September 1882, PTAED, SM016006b.

page 133: It received the most complete coverage: "Edison's Electric Light,"
NYT, 5 September 1882.

page 133: The official beginning: "Edison's Illuminators."
page 134: It had taken four long years: Charles Bazerman, The Languages of

Edison's Light (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1999), 233-234.
page 134: At the time of the first announcement: "Edison's Newest Marvel,"

NYS, 16 September 1878, PTAED, SB032123a.
page 134: After a few weeks: "Edison's Electric Light," NYS, 20 October

1878, PTAED, MBSB20963.
page 135: Characteristically, Edison announced: "Edison's Electric Light,"

NYH, 3 December 1878, PTAED, MBSB21047; Friedel and Israel, Edi
son's Electric Light, 64.

page 135: The only shortcoming: Harold Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers,
1875-1900 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), 183.



 \ 323

page 135: Edison Electric did not charge: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 409.
page 135: Short circuits: Jehl, Reminiscences, 1083-1084. Short circuits be

neath New York's streets produced sights more unusual than this. Almost
twenty years later, a short circuit in an electric trolley sent up through the
trolley's street-level slot a sheet of flame four feet tall that traveled up the
street. Fortunately, there were no injuries. "Electric Display at Bridge,"
NYT, 4 October 1902.

page 135: Some customers seemed: T. A. Edison, "Introduction," in Edison
Construction Department, "Questions for Central Stations Engineers,"
1883, PTAED, CD001: image 42.

page 135: One such customer: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 437.
page 136: J. P. Morgan: Martin, Forty Years of Edison Service, 61-62; Dyer

and Martin, Edison, 410-411.
page 137: The initial data: Martin, Forty Years ofEdison Service, 66-67.
page 137: He had said the previous year: "Doom of Gas."
page 137: Two months after Edison Electric: "Edison and His Light" clipping

from unidentified publication [but likely a Port Huron, Michigan, news
paper], 13 March 1883, PTAED, D8320D1.

page 13 7: After a year: Martin, Forty Years ofEdison Service, 66-67.
page 137: To Edison's credit: Jehl, Reminiscences, 936.
page 138: The second district: Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, 120.
page 138: the nation's first hydropower plant: McDonald, Let There Be Light,

35-37.

page 138: The only line of products: Forrest McDonald, Insull (Chicago: Uni
versity of Chicago Press, 1962), 29-30.

page 139: he was invited to Boston: Jehl, Reminiscences, 997-998.

CHAPTER 7. 

page 143: She was plagued: Paul Israel corrects a mistake perpetuated by previ
ous biographers who assumed Edison was referring to his ailing wife when
he telegraphed Samuel Insull in April 1884: "Send trained man nurse who is
not afraid of person out of mind. Send as soon as possible." TAE to Samuel
InsulI, telegram, 7 April 1884, PTAED, D8414F. Israel says the nurse was
needed not for Mary but for her father, who died two days later. Israel, Edi
son, 232. We do have fragmentary evidence, however, that at that same
time Mary was unwell, too, such as her complaint that "I am so awfully
sick I am afraid.... My head is nearly splitting and my throat is very sore."
Mary Edison to Samuel InsulI, 30 April 1884, PTAED, D8414I.

page 143: what her doctor termed: Robert Lozier to John Tomlinson, 9 August
1884, PTAED, D841401.

page 143: His daughter Marion: Marion Edison Oser reminiscences, quoted in
Israel, Edison, 230. Israel suggests that Edison "felt a sense of guilt for the
long, hard hours he had worked at the expense of his family."

page 143: Mary's mother, Margaret: Conot, Streak of Luck, 22; Madeleine
Sloane, Oral History, 1 December 1972, ENHS, Interview #1, 18.



324 / 

page 144: newspapers and magazines: Wyn Wachhorst, Thomas Alva Edison:
An American Myth (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981),44-45.

page 144: A book about prominent New Yorkers: Stephen Fiske, Off-Hand
Portraits of Prominent New Yorkers (New York: Geo. R. Lockwood &
Son, 1884), 108.

page 144: With Edison's blessing: Jehl, Reminiscences, 1000.
page 144: marched down Madison Avenue: "Electrical Stunts in 1884," Edi

son Monthly, October 1925, 237-238.
page 144: the "Edison Darkey": "The Edison Exhibit at the Philadelphia Elec

trical Exhibition," Scientific American, 18 October 1884, 246.
page 144: One report said: "Electrical Stunts in 1884."

page 144: Longtime Edison associate William Hammer: Electrical Diablerie,
n.d., Smithsonian/National Museum of American History, William J.
Hammer Collection. The pamphlet credits two primary sources: NYW,
3 January 1885, and Newark Daily Advertising and Journal, 3 January
1885. The Smithsonian has placed the full text of the pamphlet online; see
http://americanhistory.si.edu/archives/d8069d.htm.

page 145: Edison wrote privately: Dagobert D. Runes, ed., The Diary and
Sundry Observations of Thomas Alva Edison (1948; reprint, New York:
Greenwood Press, 1968),29.

page 145: Reading a headline: "John Roach Embarrassed," NYT, 19 July 1885.
page 145: Just a year before: TAE to John Roach, 25 June 1884, PTAED,

LBCD7013.

page 145: William Croffut, the reporter: W. A. Croffut, "Edison's Latest Inven
tion," Omaha Bee, 20 June 1885, PTAED, SB017010a.

page 146: a director of the company: "Overhead Wires," Philadelphia Press,
31 May 1885, PTAED, SB017083b and SB017014a.

page 146: let go of the captain's chair: In the summer and fall of 1884, Edison's
twenty-two-year-old assistant Samuel Insull had conducted a brilliant and
successful proxy fight that bested J. P. Morgan and secured his employer's
control of the board. Forrest McDonald, Insull (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962), 31-32.

page 146: he asked his old friend: Israel, Edison, 234.
page 146: the two men founded: Ibid., 237.
page 146: William Croffut obligingly offered: "The Wizard Edison," Chicago

Tribune, 30 April 1885, PTAED, SM062040. This wireless technology is
more interesting today perhaps than it would have been then. The technol
ogy relied upon the principle of induction, so cannot be said to be a direct
antecedent of today's cell phones or wireless broadband. But it does offer
an early instance of the quest to employ electricity to communicate while
on the move.

page 147: Edison directed Samuel Insull: TAE to Samuel Insull, n.d. [early May
1885], PTAED, D8503ZEX.

page 147: In his note of thanks: William Croffut to Samuel Insull, 15 May
1885, PTAED, D8541M.



NOTEs\325

page 147: Edison had sent the shares: TAE to Samuel Insull, n.d. [early May
1885], PTAED, D8503ZEX.

page 147: Insull soon concluded: Samuel Insull to TAE, 29 March 1886,
PTAED, LB021464.

page 148: Edison met: New Orleans Picayune, 8 February 1886, PTAED,
SB017124d. The clipping is untitled.

page 148: Edison invited Insull: TAE to Samuel Insull, 27 June 1885, PTAED,
D8503ZBD. Edison failed to make his verb agree with the plural subject;
he also omitted"of" after" lots."

page 149: entertainment of the group: Edison refers at one point to the guests
sitting around a table while making individual entries. Sharing must have
begun before the ink was dry; Edison declared another's efforts "very
witty." Runes, Diary, 20.

page 149: The first entry: Ibid., 3.
page 149: a later entry: Ibid., 22.
page 149: Edison reported: Ibid., 6-7, 8.
page 149: he submitted out of fear: Ibid., 14. On p. 29 he again refers to the

shirts: "Donned a boiled and starched emblem of respectability."
page 149: a book by Hawthorne: Ibid., 4.
page 149: two suicides: Ibid., 10.
page 149: his description of a clerk: Ibid., 31-32.
page 149: Edison's trip into town: Ibid., 17.
page 149: When Marion showed her father: Ibid., 6-7.
page 150: Edison thinks Marion's jealousy: Ibid., 22.
page 150: Edison had noticed: Ibid., 16.
page 150: A contemporary newspaper: New Orleans Picayune, 8 February

1886.

page 150: The first meeting: The two men could not have gotten to know each
other very well, or Miller would not have had so much to tell his daughter
two years later, after a stay with Edison that afforded "a better opportu
nity to get acquainted with him." Lewis Miller to Mina Miller Edison, 26
April 1887, PTAED, FH001AAA.

page 150: traveled farther upstate: Israel, Edison, 247.
page 150: Looking back on the trip: "Autobiographical," in Runes, Diary, 54-55.
page 150: story from family lore: Lillian P. Warren, interview transcript, 2 July

1973, ENHS, 3. Warren was the niece of Lillian Gilliland, Ezra T.
Gilliland's wife.

page 151: Edison said that Miller tapped back: "Autobiographical," in Runes,
Diary, 54-55.

page 151: Edison formally wrote: TAE to Lewis Miller, 30 September 1885,
PTAED, B037AA. Paul Israel points out the possibility that Insull helped
with the letter. Insull was a skilled writer and Edison was not. Insull's role
would explain how the letter was polished to a high gloss. Israel, Edison,
247.

page 151: Reporters were present: "Mr. Edison's Wedding," NYT, 25 February



326 / 

1886. Edison was accompanied by his closest colleagues, including Insull,
Edward Johnson, Charles Batchelor, and Sigmund Bergmann.

page 151: train trip south: "Edison to Invent a Cotton-Picker," NYW, 27 Feb
ruary 1886, PTAED, SB017119c.

page 152: each entry dated: For an example, see the entry about incandescent
bulbs for 18 March 1886 in PTAED, N314003.

page 152: she commuted daily: Norman Speiden, transcript of ENHS tour,
8 January 1971, ENHS, 24.

page 152: after almost forty years: Martha Coman and Hugh Weir, "The Most
Difficult Husband in America," Collier's, 18 July 1925.

page 152: She weighed the advantages: Ibid.
page 152: planned suburban community: Samuel Swift, "Llewellyn Park: The

First American Suburban Community," House and Garden, June 1903,
327. Llewellyn Haskell, the community's founder, belonged to a religious
group self-named the Perfectionists. For an early contemporaneous ac
count of the community's founding, see "Llewellyn Park," NYT, 23 April
1865.

page 152: Henry Pedder: "Mr. Pedder's Luxurious Habits," NYT, 19 July
1884. Pedder was a longtime employee of the Arnold, Constable & Com
pany department store ("Everything from Cradle to Grave"). He was a
clerk, not a principal, but by dint of his seniority, he was privy to all the fi
nancial details of the business. The New York newspapers savored the

story, but did not explain why no one at Arnold, Constable had wondered
before then how a clerk earning $30,000 a year had managed to pay cash
for a home that cost at least $200,000.

page 152: The real estate agent: Edward P. Hamilton & Co. to TAE, 12 Janu
ary 1886, PTAED, D8603L.

page 153: So eager was the department store: W. A. Croffut, Interview with
TAE, New York Mail and Express, 8 October 1887, cited in Nerney, Edi
son, 277. The price of $125,000 is the amount listed in the county records.
See Kristin S. Herron, The House at Glenmont: Historic Furnishings Re
port I (West Orange, N.].: National Park Service, Edison National His
toric Site, 1998), 14n16.

page 153: exhibition space: In the 1990s, Bill Gates, uneasy about the expense
of his own budget-busting family home, wanted the public to know that its
Tomorrowland furnishings would help Microsoft show company guests
the way to the future. Bill Gates, Nathan Myhrvold, and Peter Rinearson,
The Road Ahead: Completely Revised and Up to Date (New York: Pen
guin, 1996),249-258.

page 153: Chandeliers had gas burners: Charles Edison, Oral History, 14 April
1953, ENHS.

page 153: Speaking tubes: Theodore M. Edison, Oral History, 26 July 1970,
ENHS.

page 153: He wrote in his diary: Runes, Diary, 8.



\327

page 154: The three-story main building: TAE to James Hood Wright, August
1887 [conjectured], PTAED, NAOl1005.

page 155: When his fund-raising efforts petered out: Andre Millard, Edison
and the Business of Invention (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1990),46, 54-55.

page 155: About this time she directed: Herron, House at Glenmont, 18, 19.
The list of household staff members is based on a note written in Septem
ber 1892, which also included mention of a nurse, a position that was
likely added after the birth of Madeleine.

page 155: Earlier, in 1887: Lewis Miller to Mina Miller Edison, 26 April 1887,
PTAED, FH001AAA,

page 155: After spending about $180,000: TAE to Henry Villard, 19 January
1888, PTAED, D8805AAI.

page 156: When Edison subsequently revised: Israel, Edison, 269.
page 156: In 1884: Fiske, Off-Hand Portraits, 113.
page 156: After reviewing the legal issues: TAE to Edward H. Johnson [conjec

tured], 22 November 1887, PTAED, D87S0AAK.
page 156: The Graphophone Company, for its part: Tate, Edison's Open Door,

135-136, 139.
page 157: Company officials tried: George Gouraud to TAE, 2 July 1887,

PTAED, D8751AAA.
page 157: He fired off a tart note: TAE to George Gouraud, 21 July 1887,

PTAED, D87S1AAB.
page 157: Gouraud congratulated Edison: George Gouraud to TAE, 1 August

1887, PTAED, D87S1AAC,
page 157: Alfred Tate, a senior manager: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 136.
page 157: Edison spoke dismissively: Ibid., 138.
page 157: A story made the rounds: Proceedings of the First Annual Convention

of Local Phonograph Companies (Nashville, Tenn.: Country Music Foun
dation Press, 1890 [reprint 1974]), 110-112. A business magazine, Manu
facturer and Builder, attempted to sort out the conflicting claims of the two
sides. After reviewing the relevant patents, it declared unequivocally that it
was indeed Tainter, not Edison, who deserved the credit for the principal
improvement, which was successfully using wax as the recording medium.
"The Graphophone," Manufacturer and Builder, August 1888, 177.

page 158: Tate described the scene: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 155. The two
men referred to in the quoted passage were Thomas Dolan and Thomas
Cochrane.

page 159: The Edison phonographs that were produced: Ezra Gilliland to
TAE, 16 December 1887, PTAED, D8750AAU.

page 159: When the press heard: "Edison Was Out $250,000," New York
News, 18 January 1889, PTAED, SB019002E. The actual amount would
have been half that reported, or $125,000.

page 159: Edison was shocked: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 172.



328 / 

page 160: Even though Edison announced: "Perfected Phonograph," Manu
facturer and Builder, June 1888, 128.

page 160: he continued to tinker: Alfred Tate to Frank McGowan, 2 July 1888,
PTAED, D8818AOH.

page 160: Edison privately told Batchelor: TAE to Charles Batchelor, 7 May
1889, PTAED, LB029325.

page 160: The governor of Wyoming: Proceedings of the First Annual Conven
tion of Local Phonograph Companies, 73.

page 160: A distributor in New York: Ibid., 191-192.
page 161: The Atlantic Monthly: Philip G. Hubert Jr., "The New Talking

Machines," Atlantic Monthly, February 1889,258.
page 161: Edison, however, was exasperated: TAE to Charles Batchelor, 7 May

1889, PTAED, LB029325.
page 161: "I was the 'dog''': Tate, Edison's Open Door, 161. The same image

would reappear in the contemporary software industry, when employees at
Microsoft, for example, would "eat our own dog food," using the pre
release version of their software for their own regular work, not just in ar
tificial tests.

page 161: He noticed that acids: Ibid., 161-162.
page 161: Eight thousand Edison machines: Ibid., 247-248.
page 161: Quality problems: Proceedings of the First Annual Convention of

Local Phonograph Companies, 36, 39.
page 162: At the first convention: Ibid., 195.
page 162: did not give the business issues as much attention: Millard, Edison

and the Business of Invention, 81.
page 162: Tate speculated: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 302.
page 162: talking doll: "Dolls That Really Talk," New York Evening Sun, 22

November 1888, PTAED, SC88130a.
page 162: In the spring of 1890: "Edison's Phonographic Doll," Scientific

American, 26 April 1890, 263.
page 163: He and toy distributors: "A Boom That Collapsed," Philadelphia

Times, 2 January 1891, PTAED, SC91001A.
page 163: On a parallel track: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 247-248.
page 163: Edison had declared publicly: "Wizard Edison at Home," NYW, 17

November 1889, PTAED, MBSB62500.

CHAPTER 8. 

page 165: Edison had earned a reputation: Josephson, Edison, 428. Josephson
does not provide a source for the quotation and suggests that he himself re
lied on a secondary source when he wrote, "Ford ... was reported to have
said of Edison ... "

page 165: attributed to Henry Ford: The full quotation is the following: "Edi
son is easily the world's greatest scientist. I am not sure that he is not also
the world's worst business man. He knows almost nothing of business."



\329

Henry Ford, in collaboration with Samuel Crowther, My Life and Work
(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page, 1922),235.

page 165: He spoke well: Forrest McDonald, Insull (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962), 35-36.

page 166: Technically gifted individuals: Tesla came up with many ingenious
electrical devices, including a brilliant design for an electric motor;
Sprague designed, and then commercialized, electric streetcars.

page 166: the cocky lad: Samuel Insull, The Memoirs of Samuel Insull: An Auto
biography, ed. Larry Plachno (Polo, Ill.: Transportation Trails, 1992),25, 31.

page 166: One evening: Ibid., 38-39.
page 167: The financial reports: Edison Electric Illuminating Company,

Monthly Reports, 1886, HFM & GVRC, Box 16, Folders 16-2, 16-3,
16-6,16-7.

page 167: One wag wrote: William D. MacQuesten, "The Edison United Man-
ufacturing Co.," typescript, 1886, PTAED, D8629E.

page 167: the two hunched over the books: Insull, Memoirs, 43-45.
page 168: It seems I had: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 381-382.
page 168: they were pleased to discover: Ibid., 382. On another occasion, Edi

son described what must have been the same incident with slightly differ
ent details-one week, rather than two weeks, passed-and drew the
following lesson: "That's the way to settle difficulties-give the people no
chance to talk." See "Edison Compares the Swiss People to the Japanese,"
NYW, 26 August 1911.

page 168: no more demands: Edison took pleasure in circumventing the power
of organized labor. A few years before this incident, when lightbulb pro
duction had depended upon the esoteric skills that only members of the
Glass Blowers Trade Guild possessed, Edison had protested when the guild
demanded that he reinstate the son of a local guild official, who had been
fired for sleeping on the job. Edison had to give in, but he set out to obtain
revenge: He put some of his lab workers to work on a secret project to de
velop machinery for lightbulb production that could be operated by un
skilled hands. The project succeeded, and Edison no longer had to deal
with the Glass Blowers Trade Guild. See Paul Kasakove, untitled reminis
cences, typescript, n.d., ENHS, 12.

page 169: The Machine Works was so cramped: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 381.
page 169: a piece of property: "Driven Away by Strikes," NYT, 24 June 1886.
page 169: The new position: InsulI, Memoirs, 48-49.
page 169: he reorganized the office: Samuel Insull to TAE, 5 November 1887,

PTAED, D8736AEL.
page 169: After his first year: Insull, Memoirs, 51.
page 170: he berated Alfred Tate: Samuel Insull to A. O. Tate, 4 June 1887,

PTAED, D8736ACI.
page 170: When he noticed: Samuel Insull to A. O. Tate, 2 September 1887,

PTAED, D8719ABE.



330/NoTES

page 170: In his second year: Samuel Insull to A. O. Tate, S July 1888, PTAED,
D883SADJ.

page 170: "The large and rapid calls": Samuel Insull to A. O. Tate, 7 January
1888, PTAED, D883SAAI.

page 170: furious at new charges: Samuel Insull to A. O. Tate, S July 1888,
PTAED, D883SADJ.

page 171: Under Insull's management: Insull, Memoirs, 49.
page 171: Looking back: Quoted in McDonald, Insull, 27-28.
page 171: A frustrated sales agent: W. J. Jenks to John H. Vail, 12 November

1887, PTAED, D8732ABP.
page 171: Edison's longtime lieutenant: Edward Johnson to TAE, 9 December

1887, PTAED, D8732ABU.
page 171: "If our patents": TAE to George Bliss, n.d., handwritten on back of

Bliss to TAE, 12 May 1888, PTAED, D880SACU.
page 172: A sample story: "Killed By an Electric Shock," NYT, 7 October 1887.
page 172: When a manager: "Killed By an Electric Shock," NYT, 6 December

1887.

page 172: In another incident: "Struck Dead in a Second," NYT, 21 January
1887.

page 172: In April 1888: "Death Courses Overhead," NYW, 17 April 1888.
page 173: An alert person: "Street Perils," NYW, 16 April 1888.
page 173: The lethal potential of electricity: The report also recommended that

after execution and postmortem the body be buried in the prison cemetery,
closing off the opportunity for the deceased's friends to obtain the body
and indulge in "the most drunken and beastly orgies" that traditionally
followed hangings. Report of the Commission to Investigate and Report
the Most Humane and Practical Method of Carrying into Effect the Sen
tence of Death in Capital Cases (Albany, N.Y.: Troy Press, 1888), 88-90.

page 173: Edison personally favored: TAE to A. P. Southwick, 19 December
1887, PTAED, LB026116.

page 173: One associate suggested: Eugene Lewis to Sherburne Eaton, 1 June
1889, PTAED, D8933ABD.

page 174: The New York Times: Untitled editorial, NYT, 11 July 1889.
page 174: In Edison's view: TAE to Edward Johnson, "Notes on Distribution

of Alternating Current," 1886, PTAED, ME004.
page 17S: no competition stood in its way: In New Orleans, where Westing

house, in combination with Brush, dramatically undercut Edison's prices,
Edison's field manager told his supervisor that "they are robbing our busi
ness pretty badly, and are able to run away into districts that we at present
cannot touch." Edison's direct-current system remained restricted to a

tightly circumscribed area around the generating plant, a fact that Westing
house's agents happily pointed out to customers. Edison's New Orleans
manager pleaded with the home office to pay attention and to "fight them
with their own weapons," that is, with alternating current. "If we don't



\331

wake up pretty soon to this fact, we shall suffer in the future for our negli
gence." W. S. Andrews to John Vail, 12 May 1887, PTAED, D8732AAR.

page 175: In June 1888: George Westinghouse Jr. to TAE, 7 June 1888,
PTAED, D8828ABV.

page 175: Edison turned down: TAE to George Westinghouse Jr., 12 June
1888, PTAED, LB026270.

page 175: He would later say: TAE to E. D. Adams, 2 February 1889, quoted
in Harold Passer, The Electrical Manufacturers, 1875-1900 (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953), 174.

page 175: Stray dogs were used: Mark Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair: A
Story of Light and Death (New York: Walker, 2003),143.

page 176: Edison told the Brooklyn Citizen: "Edison's New Ideas," Brooklyn
Citizen, 4 November 1888, PTAED, SM038071d.

page 176: Edison's bounty offer: Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair, 143.
page 176: The very day: TAE to Henry Bergh, 13 July 1888, PTAED,

LB026273.

page 176: Henry Bergh: Henry Bergh to TAE, 14 July 1888, PTAED,
D8828ACI.

page 176: It had been his letter: TAE to A. P. Southwick, 19 December 1887,
PTAED, LB026116.

page 176: had persuaded one member: Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair,
118.

page 177: a new attorney who volunteered: Ibid., 173.
page 177: What would happen: "Edison Says It Will Kill," NYS, [24 July

1889], PTAED, MBSB62484A; Kemmler v. Durston hearing, 23 July
1889, PTAED, QE003A0623.

page 177: George Westinghouse stepped forward: George Westinghouse, "No
Special Danger," letter to the editor, NYT, 13 December 1888; Harold P.
Brown, "The Comparative Danger to Life of the Alternating and Continu
ous Electrical Currents," 1889, PTAED, QE003AI016A. Brown repro
duced Westinghouse's widely circulated letter in order to rebut it, point by
point.

page 178: On 11 October 1889: "Met Death in the Wires," NYT, 12 October
1889.

page 178: among the witnesses: One of the witnesses, Charles Thompson, who
was a superintendent of the Brooklyn American District Telegraph Com
pany, collapsed with "apoplexy" the next day and was in critical condi
tion. The New York Times said he had been in excellent condition and
"had witnessed the frightful death of Feeks, and the sight made him very
ill." "Excited by Feeks's Death," NYT, 13 October 1889.

page 179: the fatal current could not be traced: A coroner's jury that was con
vened heard testimony from representatives of many companies, each
pointing the finger of blame at someone else. "How Feeks Met His
Death," NYT, 22 October 1889.



332 / 

page 179: Edison did not add his support: "Death in the Wires," Wilmington
News, 14 October 1889, PTAED, SC89179B.

page 179: In October 1889, he urged: "Edison's Remedy," New York Evening
Sun, 14 October 1889, PTAED, SC89182A.

page 179: When George Westinghouse read: Sherburne Eaton to TAE, 7 Octo
ber 1889, PTAED, D8954ADC.

page 179: Westinghouse decided to speak: "Mr. Westinghouse Talks," NYT,
24 October 1889.

page 180: "If all things involving": Ibid.
page 180: seized an opportunity: TAE, "Dangers of Electric Lighting," North

American Review, November 1889, 628. Edison put the disquieting image
of nitroglycerin to work once again: "If a nitro-glycerin factory were being
operated in the city of New York and the people desired to remove the
danger, no one would suggest putting it underground."

page 180: sixty-four people were killed: George Westinghouse, "A Reply to
Mr. Edison," North American Review, December 1889, 661.

page 181: Don't underestimate the power: Ibid., 657.
page 181: Westinghouse also dredged up: Ibid., 655.
page 181: Those customers who had a choice: Ibid., 664.
page 181: As historian Mark Essig: Essig, Edison and the Electric Chair, 290.

Essig mentions a medical-journal article from the early twentieth century
to illustrate his point that Edison's fears about electric shocks for a long
while appeared to have been borne out: "A Case of Death from the Electric
Current While Handling the Telephone."

page 182: In his official biography: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 382.
page 182: the value of the shares: InsulI, Memoirs, 53.
page 182: an opportunity to cash out: "Mr. Edison Is Satisfied," NYT, 21 Feb

ruary 1892.

page 182: He wrote Villard afterward: TAE to Henry Villard, 8 February 1890,
PTAED, LB037198.

page 182: Iron-ore mining: "An Iron Mine Reopened," NYT, 2 December
1889.

page 182: Insull wrote a colleague: Samuel Insull to Alfred Tate, 30 July 1889,
PTAED, LB031451, 6.

page 183: "my usefulness": "Mr. Edison's Reply to Thomson-Houston Memo
randa of March 23rd, 1889," 1 April 1889, PTAED, HM89AAI, 6.

page 183: Edison had assumed that his laboratory: TAE to Henry Villard,
8 February 1890, PTAED, LB037198.

page 184: InsulI, not bothering to hide his anger: Samuel Insull to Thomas
Alva Edison, 16 July 1890, PTAED, D9033AAN.

page 184: Edison did not like: Alfred Tate to Samuel InsulI, 18 July 1890,
PTAED, LB042394.

page 184: Only the warden: "Far Worse Than Hanging," NYT, 7 August 1890.
page 185: One of the first individuals: Westinghouse is not mentioned by name.

The telegram was sent "to the electric-light company which has been car-



NOTEs\333

rying on all the opposition to electrical executions, because it was its dy
namos that were being used." "Far Worse Than Hanging."

page 185: When asked for his reaction: "Westinghouse Is Satisfied," NYT, 7
August 1890.

page 185: Shibuya Jugiro: Many contemporaneous and secondary English
language sources mistook Shibuya's personal name, Jugiro, for his surname.

page 185: the electric chair got another chance: Essig, Edison and the Electric
Chair, 258-259, 263, 285.

page 186: Edison's claim: "As Revolting as Hanging," NYW, 24 June 1888.
page 186: the sales leader: In 1891, the last year before the merger, Edison Gen

eral Electric had annual sales of $10.9 million; Thomson-Houston, $10.3
million; and Westinghouse, $5 million. The difference in cost structures
among the three companies can be readily seen by comparing payroll costs.
Edison General Electric had 6,000 employees; Thomson-Houston, 4,000;
and Westinghouse, 1,300. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, 150.

page 186: historian Forrest McDonald: McDonald, InsulI, 46.
page 186: Samuel Insull appreciated: Insull, Memoirs, 56.
page 187: When the press asked him: "Mr. Edison Is Satisfied."

page 187: "I have always regretted": Tate, Edison's Open Door, 261.
page 187: Edison could say: "Mr. Edison Is Satisfied."

page 187: Years later, Insull said: Insull, Memoirs, 56.
page 188: When Edison's own children: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History, 1 De

cember 1972, ENHS, Interview #1, 31; Matthew Josephson quotes corre
spondence he had with Charles Edison on the same point. See Josephson,
Edison, 365n.

page 188: narrowly escaped bankruptcy: J. P. Morgan led a syndicate of
bankers that supplied the cash that got the company through the worst of
the crisis. Passer, Electrical Manufacturers, 328.

CHAPTER 9. FUN

page 189: "I'm going to do something": Tate, Edison's Open Door, 278. Tate's
account is a reconstruction written many years later, and it does not pro
vide reliable information about when it took place. The author said this
conversation took place several months after the Edison General Electric
merger with Thomson-Houston, but at that point Edison was already well
along in building his ore-processing plant at the Ogden mine. It must have
taken place earlier, perhaps shortly after the consolidation that resulted in
the formation of Edison General Electric.

page 189: a laboratory notebook recorded: Charles Mott, Journal, 25 March
1880, PTAED, N053:17.

page 190: bought the Ogden iron mine: "An Iron Mine Reopened," NYT, 2
December 1889.

page 190: it was cheaper: Charles Edison, Oral History, 14 April 1953, ENHS.
page 190: a five-ton chunk: "The Edison Concentrating Works," Iron Age, 28

October 1897.



334/NoTES

page 191: In the winter: Charles Edison, Oral History, 14 April 1953, ENHS.
page 191: In the summer: TAE to Mina Edison, 9 August 1895, PTAED,

B037AAY.

page 191: Ambient dust: TAE to Mina Edison, 11 August 1895, PTAED,
B037AAZ.

page 191: It lasted five years: Dyer and Martin, Edison, 501.
page 192: "Darling Sweetest": TAE to Mina Edison, 12 August 1895, PTAED,

B037ABA. Edison wrote "cuteist" in the original, but love letters should
be spared the academic apparatus of "sic" superimposed.

page 192: "Last night I felt blue": TAE to Mina Edison, 11 August 1895,
PTAED, B037AAZ.

page 192: He humored her: TAE to Mina Edison, 9 August 1895, PTAED,
B037AAY.

page 192: He teased her: TAE to Mina Edison, 12 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABA.

page 192: He praised her: TAE to Mina Edison, 15 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABB.

page 192: He lectured her: TAE to Mina Edison, 16 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABC.

page 192: He teased her: TAE to Mina Edison, 18 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABD.

page 192: He advised her: TAE to Mina Edison, 15 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABB.

page 192: His chief assistant: TAE to Mina Edison, 21 August 1895, PTAED,
B037ABE.

page 193: Edison wrote a colleague: TAE to Richard Bowker, 6 August 1897,
PTAED, LM245410.

page 193: he was proud: TAE to Mina Edison, n.d. [summer 1896 conjec
tured], PTAED, B037ABM.

page 193: In 1902, at a time when General Electric shares: Dyer and Martin,
Edison,504-505.

page 194: As late as 1892: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 253.
page 194: By the next year: TAE to Edison United Phonograph Company, 16

June 1893, TAEPM, 134:740.
page 194: Public health authorities worried: Untitled, Chicago News, 31 July

1890, PTAED, SC90041D.
page 195: Phonograph dealers who invested: The general manager of the

Chicago Central Phonograph Company declared that he felt the 50 per
cent royalty was unjust, and that his company would not give it up "if we
can possibly help it, and I believe we can." Proceedings of the First Annual
Convention of Local Phonograph Companies (Nashville, Tenn.: Country
Music Foundation Press, 1890 [reprint 1974]),181-182.

page 195: A San Francisco distributor: Ibid., 163-164.
page 195: prurient storytelling: Charles Musser, The Emergence of Cinema: The

American Screen to 1907 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990), 61.



\335

page 195: "Kinetoscope Moving View": TAE, patent caveat, filed 8 October
1888, PTAED, PT031AAAL

page 195: The first version: W. K. L. Dickson and Antonia Dickson, History of
the Kinetograph, Kinetoscope, and Kinetophotograph (privately printed,
1895) [facsimile edition, Museum of Modern Art, New York, 2000], 8.

page 196: It was Dickson who would advance: Historians of early cinema have
given much attention to apportioning credit for the development of the
technology we would recognize today. In these appraisals, Dickson re
ceives the bulk of the credit that the general public has mistakenly be
stowed upon Edison. Gordon Hendricks's The Edison Motion Picture

Myth (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961) is particularly criti
cal of Edison's ethical lapses, listing in detail numerous examples of Edison
laboratory records that were altered in order to give a false impression that
Edison's contributions were greater, and took place earlier, than was in fact
the case.

page 196: designed an ingenious camera: Israel, Edison, 294; Hendricks, Edi
son Motion Picture Myth, 52; Terry Ramsaye, A Million and One Nights:
A History of the Motion Picture Through 1925 (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1926), 145.

page 196: While Edison was in Paris: Dickson and Dickson, History of the
Kinetograph, 19.

page 197: Another month went by: Hendricks, Edison Motion Picture Myth, 82.
page 197: a console made of wood: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 283.
page 197: Blacksmith Scene: Charles Musser, Thomas A. Edison and His Kine

tographic Motion Pictures (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press, 1995), 14-15.

page 197: When he filed: Ramsaye, Million and One Nights, 76. Historian
Charles Musser suggests that Edison knew that his patent claims were so

dependent upon the prior work of Europeans that they would never sur
vive challenge overseas. Musser, Emergence of Cinema, 71-72.

page 197: When Edison visited Chicago: "Wizard Edison's Vision," NYT, 13
May 1891.

page 197: would provide one visitor: Katherine M. Rogers, L. Frank Baum,
Creator of Oz (New York: St. Martin's Press, 2002), 46.

page 198: the Wizard of Oz: Frank Morgan, the actor who played the Wizard
in the 1939 film adaptation of Baum's book, bears considerable physical
resemblance to Edison.

page 198: burden proved too much to bear: Charles Musser, Before the Nick
elodeon: Edwin S. Porter and the Edison Manufacturing Company (Berke
ley: University of California Press, 1991),38.

page 198: Tate had proceeded: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 284-285.
page 198: Before closing in October: Norm Bolotin and Christine Laing, The

World's Columbian Exposition: The Chicago World's Fair of 1893 (Ur
bana: University of Illinois Press, 2002), 20.

page 198: machines were not completed: Tate, Edison's Open Door, 284-285.



336 / 

page 198: too late for the fair: Expectations were so high that a number of
writers who have written about the 1893 fair have erroneously assumed
that the kinetoscopes had been delivered as promised. See, for example,
Erik Larson, The Devil in the White City (New York: Crown, 2003), 247;
and Robert Sklar, Movie-Made America: A Social History of the American
Movies (New York: Random House, 1975), 13.

page 198: In February 1894: TAE to Eadweard Muybridge, 21 February 1894
[conjectured], PTAED, D9425AAF.

page 199: "The wizard Edison's idea": "Fun in a Phonograph," New York
Morning Advertiser, 8 April 1894, PTAED, SC94013a.

page 199: an Albany newspaper: "Some of Edison's Latest," Albany Telegram,
7 January 1894, PTAED, SC94001A.

page 199: Edison, however, continued: Thomas A. Edison, "Introduction to
'Edison's Invention of the Kineto-Phonograph,'" Century, June 1894,206.

page 200: The bodybuilder had agreed: "Sandow at the Edison Laboratory,"
Orange Chronicle, 10 March 1894. The very short film Sandow, like
Blacksmith Scene (mentioned above), is now available on DVD. Kino In
ternational and the Film and Media department of the Museum of Modern
Art, with the Library of Congress, released in 2005 Edison: The Invention
of the Movies, a beautifully produced set of four DVDs containing 140
Edison Company films produced between 1891 and 1918.

page 200: It does not, however, include: "Sandow at the Edison Laboratory."
page 201: a group of young entrepreneurs: Ramsaye, A Million and One

Nights,106-107.
page 201: Rector, who had a background: Ibid., 108; Tilden Co. and Enoch

Rector to Edison Manufacturing Company, 30 July 1894, PTAED,
D9427AAH.

page 202: On 15 June 1894: "Jack Cushing's Waterloo," NYW, 16 June 1894.
page 202: Edison took great personal interest: Ibid.; "Fight for Edison," New

York Journal, 16 June 1894, PTAED, SC94009C.
page 203: The plan went well: "Jack Cushing's Waterloo."
page 203: When the Kinetoscope Exhibiting Company: Ramsaye, Million and

One Nights, 109-110.
page 203: the Latham brothers moved quickly: Ibid., 110.
page 203: Corbett, on his part: Musser, Emergence of Cinema, 84.
page 204: Gentleman Jack: Gentleman Jim, the 1942 movie adaptation of his

autobiography, starred Errol Flynn.
page 204: On the day of Corbett's fight: "Knocked Out by Corbett," NYS,

8 September 1894.
page 204: One account said: "Before the Wizard," Los Angeles Times, 8 Sep

tember 1894.

page 204: A bit later: "Knocked Out by Corbett."
page 204: when a local judge heard: "Pugilist Corbett May Be Indicted," NYT,

9 September 1894.



\337

page 204: Mina told the authorities: "Inventor Edison and the Grand Jury,"
NYT, 14 September 1894.

page 205: As pleased as they were: Ramsaye, Million and One Nights,
110-112.

page 205: others urged Edison: Ramsaye, Million and One Nights, 119.
page 206: "there will be a use": Edison's prediction brings to mind the predic

tion invariably attributed to IBM chairman Thomas J. Watson, circa 1943:
"I think there is a world market for maybe five computers." The Watson
quotation turns out to be difficult to verify. Biographer Kevin Maney did
his best and concluded, "No evidence exists that Watson made the remark
about five computers." See Kevin Maney, The Maverick and His Machine:
Thomas Watson, Sr., and the Making of IBM (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley
& Sons, 2003),355.

page 206: without his boss's approval: Ramsaye, A Million and One Nights,
118-119,121,126.

page 206: The projected images: "Magic Lantern Kinetoscope," NYS, 22 April
1895.

page 207: Professor Latham wrote a letter: "Latham's Pantopticon," NYS, 23
April 1895.

page 207: A few weeks later: Ramsaye, Million and One Nights, 134-136.
page 207: a broadside printed for the occasion: "Latham's Eidoloscope,"

broadside, reproduced in Musser, Emergence of Cinema, 98.
page 207: "Edison Not in It!": Ramsaye, Million and One Nights, 135. The

source for the headline is the Chicago Inter-Ocean, 11 June 1895.
page 207: Not only in the United States: Musser, Emergence of Cinema, 91.
page 208: In September 1895: Ibid., 103-104.
page 208: Edison personally handwrote: TAE to Ingersoll-Sergeant Drill Co.,

3 October 1895, PTAED, LM229175.
page 208: In one letter he tells her: TAE to Mina Edison, n.d. [1896 conjec

tured], PTAED, B037ABN. In a subsequent letter to Mina, Edison asked
if she had figured out the "Coming Woman" joke. If she hadn't, he
joked that when he returned home "I will bring diagrams and explana
tory notes." TAE to Mina Edison, n.d. [1896 conjectured], PTAED,
B037ABO.

page 208: While Raff & Gammon: Ramsaye, Million and One Nights, 218-219.
page 209: Their plan also required: Raff & Gammon to Thomas Armat,

5 March 1896, quoted in ibid., 224-225.
page 209: when it made its debut: "Edison's Vitascope Cheered," NYT, 24

April 1896; "Edison's Latest Invention," NYT, 26 April 1896.
page 209: The inaugural film program offered: "At the Playhouses," Los An

geles Times, 7 July 1896.
page 210: At another site: "Edison Vitascope," Los Angeles Times, 25 July 1896.
page 210: In the first week: "A Mysterious Invention," Los Angeles Times, 12

July 1896.



338 / 

CHAPTER 10. 

page 211: Edison Chemical Company: "Suit by Inventor Edison," Wilmington
Evening, 21 January 1903, TAEPM, 221:241.

page 212: I probably never will: TAE Jr. to Mina Edison, 15 May 1897,
PTAED, FC001AAK.

page 212: Later that year: TAE Jr. to Mina Edison, 12 November 1897,
PTAED, FC001ABC.

page 212: Within a few days: "Edison, Jr., Wizard," NYH, 5 December 1897,
PTAED, SC97058A.

page 213: He soon landed: "The Electrical Exhibition," NYT, 24 April 1898.
page 213: A small accident: "Accident in the Garden," NYT, 24 May 1898;

"Electrical Inventors' Risks," NYT, 3 July 1898.
page 213: So it was he: "Cooking by Electricity," NYT, 22 May 1898.
page 213: Fortuitously, investors appeared: Israel, Edison, 390.
page 214: Edison Sr. was outraged: William Edison to TAE Jr., [Dec] 1898,

TAEPM, 227:591.
page 214: Tom Jr. wrote his father: TAE Jr. to TAE, 19 Dec 1898, TAEPM,

227:586-90.

page 214: gold-digging strumpet: Israel, Edison, 390.
page 214: His brother Will: William Edison to Mina Edison, 25 May 1899,

TAEPM, 221:749.
page 214: He had come up with: "Young Edison's Fame Is Now Interna

tional," NYT, 1 June 1903.
page 214: the Edison Chemical Company: "Suit by Inventor Edison," Wil

mington Evening, 21 January 1903, TAEPM, 221:241.
page 215: he wrote his father: TAE Jr., to TAE, 29 December 1902. Tom Jr.

claimed to be in a desperate situation exacerbated by poor health. He told
his father that "I am confined to my bed and have been for several weeks

past with the prospect of remaining there for sometime to come." He was
fully aware that his business dealings with strangers eager to exploit his
name would end unhappily-"I know of no business deal that I have ever
made that [sic] I was not taken advantage of." But he believed he had no
choice because the contracts "are of course the only means by which I de
rive a living." TAEPM, 187:756.

page 215: In the father's retrospective account: "Wizard Edison Menaces with
Prison the Men Who Used His Son's Name," New York American, 8 Octo
ber 1904, TAEPM, 221:283.

page 215: A press account: "Suit by Inventor Edison."
page 215: The future would bear this out: H. F. Miller to Mrs. Martha H. Kirk,

8 March 1911, ENHS.
page 215: "incapable of making": "Barred by Fraud Order," NYT, 5 October

1904. Tom Jr. was persuaded to falsely attest in a separate affidavit that he
was not the Vitalizer's inventor. See "Suit by Inventor Edison."

page 216: Contending that selling: "Barred by Fraud Order"; "That Edison



\339

Company," NYT, 6 October 1904; "Edison Jr. Mail Held for Fraud,"
NYH, 6 October 1904, TAEPM, 221:282.

page 216: He told the New York American: "Wizard Edison Menaces with
Prison the Men Who Used His Son's Name."

page 216: In 1900: "Edison Will Make Automobiles the Poor Man's Vehicle,"
Elmira Telegram, 22 June 1902, TAEPM, 221:217.

page 216: prototype electric car: "Edison's Most Important Discovery,"
Harper's Weekly, 21 December 1901, 1302.

page 216: By 1902: "Chauffeur Gave Edison a Scare," NYW, 30 June 1902,
TAEPM,221:219.

page 217: he was excited to see: TAE to George B. Dresher, 18 May 1910,
ENHS, Letterbook, vol. 82.

page 217: Prospective customers were told: "Mr. Edison's Perpetual Hobby,"
advertisement, n.d. [1910?], ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies
Box 24. National Phonograph Company-Advertisements. The fact that
its trademarked name, "phonograph," had entered the language and the
dictionary was also offered as proof of its uniqueness.

page 217: In at least one instance: "Thos A. Edison" [composed by George
Silzer of Harger & Blish] to George Sturgis, 10 February 1915, ENHS,
TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1, Correspondence,
February 1915.

page 218: Edison's staff was so aghast: William Maxwell to George C. Silzer,
17 February 1915, ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files,
Box 1, Correspondence, February 1915.

page 218: one man, writing from Marcus: George Hooper to TAE, 17 Febru
ary 1915. ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1,
Correspondence, February 1915.

page 218: William Maxwell: William Maxwell to George C. Silzer, 25 Febru
ary 1915, ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1,
Correspondence, February 1915.

page 218: The dealer replied: George Silzer to William Maxwell, 5 March
1915, ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1, Corre
spondence, February 1915.

page 218: An entire block: Paul Kasakove, untitled reminiscences, n.d., ENHS, 15.
page 218: By 1907: "Something About Our Concrete Buildings," Edison

Phonograph Monthly, July 1907, 3. Concrete also permitted Edison to
thumb his nose at the bricklayer's union, which had threatened to blacklist
him when he earlier had used his own nonunion staff to quickly throw up
a small brick out-building. See Kasakove, untitled reminiscences, 15.

page 218: A pithy rubric: "Made in America in 1888-Made Perfect in 1914,"
advertisement in Detroit Times, 12 January 1915, ENHS, TAE Inc. Phono
graph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1, Correspondence, 1914.

page 218: "When the King of England": Advertisement, Edison Phonograph
Monthly, December 1906, 15.



340/NoTES

page 219: In 1908: Edison phonograph advertisement, Cosmopolitan, June 1908.
page 219: Another advertisement promised: "Never overlook the value of an

Edison Phonograph as an ice breaker ... ," advertisement, April 1907,
ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies Box 24. National Phono
graph Company-Advertisements.

page 219: Victrola: Andre Millard, America on Record: A History of Recorded
Sound (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 130, 131.

page 219: cost about seven cents: Ibid., 49.
page 220: insisted that his discs be twice the thickness: Andre Millard, Edison

and the Business of Invention (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1990), 301.

page 220: An adapter permitted: TAE to G. M. Gregg, 18 February 1914,
ENHS; William H. Meadowcroft to D. J. Walker, 5 May 1914, ENHS.

page 220: "these miserable dance": TAE to A. G. Spencer, 23 November 1915,
ENHS.

page 220: Jazz was for: Hugh R. Fraser, "The Old Man," unpublished manu
script, 1954, ENHS, 463.

page 220: He also dismissed: TAE to Thomas Graf, 20 November 1911, ENHS.
page 220: Sergei Rachmaninoff: Emily Thompson, "Machines, Music, and the

Quest for Fidelity: Marketing the Edison Phonograph in America,
1877-1925," Musical Quarterly 79:1 (Spring 1995): 169n90. Paul
Kasakove's recollection is slightly different. He remembers Edison's sum
mary dismissal of Rachmaninoff as "He thumps!": Kasakove, untitled
reminiscences, 35.

page 220: In 1911, Edison wrote: TAE to Thomas Graf, 20 November 1911,
ENHS.

page 221: Edison approached music: "Edison Analyzes Music, Finds Lack of
Originality," NYW, 12 February 1911.

page 221: His daughter Madeleine: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History, 1 Decem
ber 1972, ENHS, Interview #1, 11.

page 221: He spent a year and a half: TAE to Ledger Smith, 25 June 1915, ENHS.
page 221: He did his best: Norman Speiden, transcript of ENHS tour, 8 Janu

ary 1971, ENHS, 9.
page 221: A little item: "Thomas A. Edison Says He Hears Through His

Teeth," Schenectady Union-Star, 6 November 1913.
page 222: she came into the sitting room: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History,

1 December 1972, ENHS, Interview #1,14.
page 222: recalled the disillusionment: A. E. Johnson and K. Ehricke, Oral His-

tory, 29 March 1971, ENHS, 19-20.
page 222: Workers spread word daily: Nerney, Edison, 251.
page 222: He was exasperated: TAE to Marcella Goodspeed, 9 June 1911, ENHS.
page 222: And it was those customers: TAE to Thomas Graf, 20 November

1911, ENHS.
page 222: By the time Edison's factory: Kasakove, untitled reminiscences, 18.



\341

page 222: On rare occasions: TAE to Alfred W. Doerx, 28 June 1913, ENHS.
page 223: Victor signed Enrico Caruso: "Talking Machine Companies Pay

$1,000,000 for Voices of Artists," Music Trades, 17 August 1912.
page 223: The others whom Victor signed: John Harvith and Susan Edwards

Harvith, eds., Edison, Musicians and the Phonograph: A Century in Ret
rospect (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987), 16.

page 223: One exception: "Sarah Bernhardt Secured for Our Records," Edison
Phonograph Monthly, February 1910, 3. The Cylinder Preservation and
Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara, has made
available online more than six thousand cylinders whose music has been dig
itized, including a few of Bernhardt's. See http://cylinders.library.ucsb.edu.

page 224: she did endorsements: "A Celebrity Extraordinaire Who Rivaled
Eiffel Tower," NYT, 2 December 2005.

page 224: Edison hated the negotiations: TAE to A. Kobb, 1 May 1914,
ENHS.

page 224: Stravinsky had written: Fraser, "Old Man," 469-470. On another
occasion, Edison was highly pleased by the phrasing of a correspondent,
who referred to "the music of bank-notes." See William H. Meadowcroft
to Frederick A. Whiting, 18 May 1917, ENHS.

page 224: "I believe if you record": TAE draft for F. L. Dyer letter of 26 De
cember 1911, 20 December 1911, ENHS, cited in Harvith and Harvith,
Edison, Musicians and the Phonograph, 5.

page 224: Over time, Edison did add: Ibid., 16.
page 224: The first record to sell: Roderic Peters, Oral History, 23 March

1973, ENHS, 6. Dalhart's name is rendered incorrectly in the transcript.
"The Prisoner's Song" was first recorded acoustically in 1924.

page 225: In 1912, the chairwoman: Sadie American to TAE, 25 April 1912,
ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Dyer folders, unmarked folder #1.

page 225: The Topeka agency: A. S. Thomas to Harger & Blish, 26 January
1915, EHNS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1, Corre
spondence, January 1915.

page 225: It fell to Edison's salespeople: Thomas A. Edison, Inc., Edison Retail
Salesman's Manual, June 1916, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Compa
nies, Box 41, Phonograph Division (TAE Inc.), Dealer's Material-Sales
Manuals [second folder of two with identical label], 19-20.

page 225: "I am sure": TAE to Santa Fe Watch Company, 16 April 1913, ENHS.
page 226: The company immediately responded: Thomas J. Schlereth, Victorian

America: Transformations in Everyday Life (New York: HarperPerennial,
1991), 193.

page 226: When a man leaves home: Advertisement for the National Phono

graph Company, Edison Phonograph Monthly, February 1907, 22.
page 227: If one complained: TAE to Harger & Blish, 8 February 1915, ENHS,

TAE Inc. Phonograph Division, Maxwell files, Box 1, Correspondence,
February 1915.



342 / 

page 227: A typical letter: TAE to Santa Fe Watch Company, 30 November
1914, ENHS.

page 228: all-concrete houses: "Concrete Dwellings," Insurance Press, 30 Oc
tober 1907, TAEPM, 221:414.

page 228: film's frames were tiny: Edison Home Kinetoscope, brochure,
15 April 1912, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, TAE Inc.
(Motion Pictures), Box 23, Folder: Kinetoscope-Apparatus Catalogs,
1912-1924.

page 228: "suppose, instead of the dull": "Edison and the New Education,"
Harper's Weekly, 4 November 1911, 8. The melding of education and en
tertainment, here championed by Edison, was brilliantly condemned in
Neil Postman's polemic, Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in
the Age ofShow Business (New York: Viking Press, 1985).

page 228: He compiled a list: Allen L. Benson, "Edison's Substitute for School
Books," World To-Day, March 1912.

page 229: His marketing pitch: "Edison and the New Education."
page 229: A year after the release: Thomas A. Edison, Inc., Sales Department

Bulletin No. 31, 16 December 1912, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Com
panies, Box 24, Motion Pictures, TAE Inc. Home Kinetoscope Dealer's
Forms and Bulletins, 1912-1914. Seven years later, Edison proposed that
the federal government assume the responsibility of producing educational
films and offering them to schools for modest rental fees. See "Edison on
Educationals," NYT, 9 February 1919.

page 229: When a business colleague: TAE to W. C. Anderson, 26 August
1912, HFM & GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-27.

page 229: The next month: "Time Card in Edison's Laboratory," Norwalk
[Ohio} Reflection, 5 October 1912.

page 229: Edison had told reporters: Israel, Edison, 422.
page 230: warn off anyone: Not every offender was pursued with equal fervor.

After handling the problems with the businesses that rented the name of
Thomas Edison Jr., the legal team found another problem: an Edison Em
ployment Bureau in New York City. The owner claimed the Edison name
by virtue of his brother-in-law, who possessed that surname, and expressed
the hope that Edison "is not so much of an egotist as to think we named
the Bureau to trade on his name." Edison directed his attorneys to drop the
matter. Howard Hayes to TAE, 12 October 1903, TAEPM, 226:40.

page 230: In the early evening: "Edison Sees His Vast Plant Burn," NYT, 10
December 1914; "The Edison Plant Fire-Swept," Edison Phonograph
Monthly, January 1915, 4-6; "Mrs. Edison Saved Husband's Records,"
NYT, 11 December 1914.

page 231: The facilities for phonograph: "Mrs. Edison Saved Husband's
Records."

page 231: A private letter: W. G. Bee to Henry Ford, 10 December 1914, HFM
& GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5. After the fire, Edison refused to publicly ac
knowledge any deficiencies in concrete. He argued that "temperatures



\343

were far in excess of those in the ordinary fire" and that the damage to his
structures had been exaggerated by the brick manufacturers, who had
published a pamphlet titled The Edison Fire. See Edison's letter to the edi
tor: "Edison's Concrete," NYT, 30 April 1915.

page 231: skipping over two thousand gallons: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 17
December 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5.

page 231: They also discovered: William Maxwell to Southern California
Music Company, 14 December 1914, ENHS, TAE Inc. Phonograph Divi
sion, Maxwell files, Box 1, Correspondence, 1914.

page 231: would receive a kind offer: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 11 December
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5.

page 231: He cracked jokes: W. G. Bee to Henry Ford, I December 1914,
HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5.

page 231: "Although I am": "Edison Sees His Vast Plant Burn."
page 232: The striking absence: "Abnormality Like His a Blessing," NYT, 12

December 1914.

page 232: "It's like the old days": Edison made a similar statement the day
after the fire: "It prevents a man from being afflicted with ennui." "Some
Answers Which Mr. Edison Made to Telegrams and Letters Received the
Day After the Fire," Edison Phonograph Monthly, January 1915, 6.

page 232: "I never intend to retire": "Edison Sails for Europe on First Trip in
22 Years, to Catch Up with Worries," Evening World, 2 August 1911.

CHAPTER II. 

page 233: lopsided arithmetic: A classic Saturday Night Live sketch playfully
pretended that a celebrity musician knew as much about everyone of his
fans as they knew about him. As Paul Simon was standing in line outside a
movie theater, a woman approached him.

Woman: Paul Simon! Hi! Oh, I'm sure you don't remember, but I
saw you in your concert at Central Park.

Paul Simon: [pauses to think] You were sitting on a plaid blan
ket ... under the elm tree.

Woman: Yes, yes!
Paul Simon: You've changed your hair since then. I like it very

much.
Woman: Thank you. Thank you!
Paul Simon: And thank you for yelling, "More!"

Other strangers approach Simon, each bringing out a feat of memory more
amazing than the last and each portraying the celebrity as intimately ac
quainted with the quotidian details of the stranger's life. Simon even re
membered the man who had bought one of his records in a Seattle record
store: "Oh, yes, you had a problem with the second side, there was a
scratch on the second cut ... " The sketch concluded with Simon's mem

ory failing him upon the arrival of Art Garfunkel, his collaborator for



344/NoTES

eleven years. Simon: "And your name is?" The show originally aired 22
November 1986. The transcript is posted to a Web site, Saturday Night
Live Transcripts. See http://snltranscripts.jt.org/86/86ememory.phtml.

page 233: At dinner on the first day: Henry Ford, in collaboration with Samuel
Crowther, Edison as I Know Him (New York: Cosmopolitan Book Corpo
ration, 1930), 1-5, 11.

page 234: The stagy dialogue: Ford's first published account of the encounter
was in his autobiography, published in 1922. There the account was brief.
It was only with the publication of Edison as I Know Him eight years later
that he filled out details and added the dialogue.

page 234: Edison did not resume: The second conversation between Edison
and Ford adds verisimilitude to Ford's account of the first precisely be
cause it does not follow his earlier inspirational theme.

page 235: "My Dear Mr. Edison": Henry Ford to TAE, 18 February 1907,
TAEPM, 191:71.

page 235: had recently been contacted: Extant correspondence does not make
clear if Will Edison had contacted Ford by February 1907. Later that year,
he told his father about his spark plug when he asked him for a loan, and
Edison turned him down. See William Edison to TAE, 13 November 1907,
TAEPM, 191: 383-385. Will wrote that he had shown the prototype of his
plug to Ford and other manufacturers and had received "nothing but
praise and not one word against it." He also said that "Ford alone will
take 16,000," but no order materialized. Three years earlier, Will headed
the W. L. Edison Automobile Station and Laboratory, which manufactured
spark plugs, plug testers, and spark coils. The manufacturing business ap
parently had to be supplemented because he also offered services such as
brokerage services and car inspections for prospective purchasers of used
cars. See William Edison to John Randolph, 12 February 1904, TAEPM,
189:190.

page 235: spasm of competitiveness: This is the theory suggested by an earlier
Edison biographer, Robert Conot. See Conot, Streak of Luck, 382.

page 236: In April 1911: W. G. Bee to Henry Ford, 6 April 1911, HFM &
GYRC, Box 2, Folder 2-18,

page 236: At the same time: W. G. Bee to W. C. Anderson, 6 April 1911, HFM
& GYRC, Box 2, Folder 2-18.

page 236: Ford accepted: Henry Ford to TAE, 27 June 1911, cited in Conot,
Streak of Luck, 382.

page 236: Finally, after Bee had arranged: TAE reply in margin of William An
derson to TAE, 29 December 1911, cited in Conot, Streak of Luck, 382.

page 236: Would Ford be interested: TAE to Henry Ford, 29 October 1912,
HFM & GYRC, Box 2, Folder 2-28.

page 236: If Jews "are as wise": Henry Ford, in collaboration with Samuel
Crowther, My Life and Work (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page, 1922),
251.



\345

page 237: "Please read this": TAE to Henry Ford, [November 1916], HFM &
GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-43.

page 237: Edison could expect sales: Agreement between Ford and Edison, 29
November 1912, HFM & GVRC, Folder 159 A, Box 4, cited in Canot,
Streak of Luck, 382.

page 237: the first slice: Stephen Mambert to Henry Ford, 23 January 1918,
HFM & GVRC, Box 16, Folder 52.

page 237: he simply made Henry Ford: "Edison Batteries for New Ford Cars,"
NYT, 11 January 1914.

page 238: The New York newspapers: "Henry Ford Seeks Mr. Edison's Aid,"
NYH, 10 January 1914.

page 238: mutual interest in gardening: Martha Coman and Hugh Weir, "The
Most Difficult Husband in America," Collier's, 18 July 1925.

page 238: Edison is said to have complained: Henry Ford and the Florida Ever
glades, typescript, n.d., HFM & GVRC, Vertical File: Edison/Ford Ever
glades.

page 238: "Mr. Edison has few friends": "Why Edison Chooses to Be Deaf,"
Literary Digest, 8 August 1925. Mina Edison also noted that Edison's
friendship with Ford had meant much to him.

page 239: Ford became his neighbor: The adjoining parcel of land owned by
Gilliland had gone through several changes of ownership and eventually
had been purchased by Edison in 1906 and absorbed into his property. In
1916, Ford purchased another plot, so did not occupy the exact spot as
Gilliland had. Personal correspondence with Bonnie Newburg, Curatorial
Department, Edison & Ford Winter Estates, 9 December 2005.

page 239: One exception: Henry Ford to TAE, 31 March 1914, HFM &
GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-42.

page 239: He did not pause: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 17 April 1914, HFM
& GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-37.

page 240: Edison complied: Ibid.
page 240: The injurious agent in Cigarettes: TAE to Friend Ford, 26 April

1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-37.
page 240: hurriedly had signs posted: "Edison Bans Cigarettes," NYT, 11 May

1914. Edison's managers would vainly attempt to enforce the ban for
years. A. C. Frost, the manager of the company's insurance department,
expressed concern that lax enforcement created a fire hazard and possibly
risked the loss of fire insurance coverage. He told line managers that "in
order to enforce this rule it may be necessary to make an example of one or
two employees." See A. C. Frost, memorandum, 6 July 1920, ENHS,
Stephen Mambert, Incoming Correspondence-1920-Edison Compa
nies, Mambert, S. B.

page 240: Edison was accustomed: "Edison Wants a Good Chew," NYT, 6
April 1914.

page 240: He did not have to: "Edison Bans Cigarettes."



346/NoTES

page 240: A New York Times editorial: "An Inventor out of His Field," NYT,
12 May 1914.

page 241: Percival Hill: "T. A. Edison Begins to Wince," New York Commer
cial, 18 May 1914.

page 241: James Zobian: "It Was Mr. Edison's Mistake," Pittsburgh Leader,
9 July 1914.

page 241: furniture made of concrete: "Joy for Newlyweds Promised by Edi
son," Boston Evening American, 10 December 1911.

page 241: Some commentators were not even certain: Untitled, Albany
Evening Journal, 14 December 1911; "Concrete Furniture? No!" Kansas
City Times, 16 December 1911.

page 241: Cartoonists had no difficulty: "A Concrete Example of the Triumph
of Mind over Matter," cartoon, Minneapolis Journal, 9 December 1911.
Also see "Mr. Edison's Concrete Furniture," Topeka Daily Capital, n.d.
Another humorous treatment is found in "Will Concrete Furniture Be
Used? Never," Davenport Times, 21 December 1911. All clippings at
ENHS, Newspaper Clippings, January-December 1911.

page 242: Edison would receive: Henry Ford to TAE, telegram, 11 February
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-34.

page 242: Mina, a birdhouse: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 25 April 1914, HFM
& GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-3.

page 242: a Model T engine: E. G. Liebold to TAE Jr, 19 February 1914; TAE
Jr. to W. G. Bee, 4 June 1914; E. G. Liebold to TAE Jr., 11 June 1914. All
three letters in HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 8-17.

page 242: followed by a new car: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 1 July 1914,
HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 242: Charles Edison received: E. G. Liebold to Charles Edison, 10 De
cember 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 242: Theodore Edison: W. G. Bee to Henry Ford, 30 November 1914,
HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5; "Ford Gives Auto to Young Edison,"
NYT, 26 December 1914. The Edisons were not the only recipients of
Ford's generosity. Later, between 1921 and 1942, Ford gave away what one
scholar estimated to be about 200 cars, 23 trucks, and 15 tractors, whose
recipients included John D. Rockefeller and Randolph A. Hearst. See
Reynold M. Wik, Henry Ford and Grass-Roots America (Ann Arbor: Uni
versity of Michigan Press, 1971), 217. In 1920, the four members of
the Edison family who lived at Glenmont-Tom, Mina, Charles, and
Theodore-had nine cars: four Fords; two Detroit Electrics; a Cadillac; a
Simplex; and a Locomobile limousine. See A. C. Frost to R. W. Kellow, 16
June 1920, ENHS, Stephen Mambert, Incoming Correspondence-1920-
Edison Companies, Mambert, S. B.

page 242: On one occasion: J. W. Hill to Henry Ford, 1 April 1916, HFM &
GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-49.

page 243: When Ford first visited: W. G. Bee to TAE, 1 April 1914, HFM &
GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-41.



\347

page 243: Movies made with Edison equipment: "Edison Batteries for New
Ford Cars," NYT, 11 January 1914.

page 243: Edison dictating machines: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 20 January
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-2.

page 243: Cement made by the Edison Portland Cement Company: Walter S.
Mallory to John Graham, 1 August 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder
4-4.

page 243: Ford Motor's chief architect: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 10 August
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 243: Ford happened to be in New York: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 11
December 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-5.

page 243: Another $100,000 loan: Stephen Mambert to Henry Ford, 23 Janu
ary 1918, HFM & GVRC, Box 16, Folder 52.

page 243: when Edison was finalizing plans: TAE to E. G. Liebold, 23 February
1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 244: It turned out that there was no such thing: E. G. Liebold to W. H.
Meadowcroft, 25 February 1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 244: Edison would have none: W. H. Meadowcroft to E. G. Liebold, 27
February 1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 244: he was "at a loss": E. G. Liebold to W. H. Meadowcroft, 1 March
1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 244: Never mind: TAE to E. G. Liebold, telegram, 18 March 1915, HFM
& GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6. This was not the end of the tale. Ford then
offered the services of one of his senior executives who was in New York,
who did call Edison and pay a visit. See E. G. Liebold to W. H. Meadow
croft, 18 March 1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 244: In October 1915: W. H. Meadowcroft to T. Commerford Martin,
5 October 1915, ENHS.

page 245: accompanied by a police officer: "Edison's Life Threatened," NYT,
27 October 1915. The year before, Edison publicly had disavowed any
plans to work on weapons: "Making things which kill men is against my
fibre." See "Edison Won't Invent Man-Killing Devices," NYT, 26 October
1914.

page 245: could not avoid being surrounded: "Noted Pair Keep Walking Eight
Hours," San Francisco Chronicle, 20 October 1915.

page 245: Edison and Ford also were feted: "Edison Laughs at Plight of Friend
Ford," San Francisco Chronicle, 21 October 1915.

page 246: Edison had his secretary: W. H. Meadowcroft to Alice Verlet,
22 March 1916, ENHS.

page 247: "I would not trouble": L. C. Curlin to TAE, 8 March 1919, and TAE
marginal note in HFM & GVRC, Box 5, Folder 5-4.

page 247: When Meadowcroft dispatched: W. H. Meadowcroft to E. G.
Liebold, 20 March 1919, HFM & GVRC, Box 5, Folder 5-4.

page 247: Liebold received the request favorably: E. G. Liebold to W. H.
Meadowcroft, 24 March 1919, HFM & GVRC, Box 5, Folder 5-4.



348/NoTES

page 247: no deal was arranged: Telephone interview with Jack Curlin, Lemuel
Calvert Curlin's grandson, 22 June 2006.

page 248: In June 1914: TAEJr. to E. G. Liebold, 3 July 1914, HFM & GVRe,
Box 8, Folder 17. For Madeleine Edison's wedding, see "Bridal Party
Dines on Eagle Rock," NYT, 16 June 1914 and "Madeleine Edison a
Bride," NYT, 18 June 1914. Madeleine's new husband, John Sloane, ap
parently wasted no time trying to use his marital tie to Edison to advance
his own business interests as an airplane manufacturer. He arranged a deal
to sell planes to the Russian government to be financed by Japan's Mitsui
Company and personally secured by funds he expected to obtain from his
father-in-law. "Sloane found himself unable to get the financial aid he ex

pected from his relatives," the New York Times later reported, when the
deal unraveled and Sloane sued Mitsui. See "Edison's Son-in-Law Sues,"
NYT, 1 May 1917.

page 248: When it finally was shipped: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 3 July 1914,
HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 248: sent a thank-you letter: TAE Jr. to E. G. Liebold, 3 July 1914, HFM
& GVRC, Box 8, Folder 17.

page 248: The company took possession: E. G. Liebold to Ford Motor Com
pany, Long Island City, 11 June 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 8-17.

page 248: Tom Jr. did make a good case: TAE Jr. to Billy [W. G. Bee], 7 July
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 249: Bee served as his advocate: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 1 July 1914,
HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 249: appears to have embarrassed Liebold: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 11
July 1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 249: When Liebold agreed: Ibid.
page 249: In January 1915, he wrote: TAEJr. to Henry Ford, 15 January 1915,

HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 16.
page 249: Later in the year, he addressed: TAE Jr. to Henry Ford, 14 November

1915, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 16.
page 250: In 1917, after visiting Detroit: TAE Jr. to Henry Ford, 16 February

1917, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 16. For other thank-you notes in this
time frame, see TAE Jr. to Henry Ford, 10 June 1917, and TAE Jr. to Henry
Ford, 7 July 1917, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 16.

page 250: The work on his gadget: Beatrice Edison to E. G. Liebold, 6 October
1919, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 17.

page 250: His Ecometer attached: The Ecometer, pamphlet, n.d. [May 1921
conjectured], HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 8-17.

page 250: Ford's engineers: Tom Jr. told Liebold that he was not discouraged
by the test results because the tests at Ford must not have been conducted
according to his instructions. He also said that "my head does bother me
more than any living being knows and all I can say is that these dreadful
pains are indeed one great big handicap to me." TAE Jr. to E. G. Liebold,
7 May 1921; TAE Jr., and Beatrice Edison to E. G. Liebold, 8 June 1921;



\349

E. J. Farkas to E. G. Liebold, 28 July 1921, HFM & GYRC, Box 8, Folder
8-17. Junior's company went into receivership in 1924. See "Receiver Gets
Inventions," NYT, 22 June 1924.

page 250: In late 1913: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, telegram, 20 November
1913, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-1.

page 250: Liebold installed: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 10 April 1914, HFM
& GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-3.

page 251: As the sales manager: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 16 April 1914,
HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-3.

page 251: Edison would devote more time: W. G. Bee to Henry Ford, 7 May
1914, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-3.

page 251: "When Mr. Edison finds out": W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 27 July
1914, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4. Capitalization in the original
letter.

page 251: Ford showed impatience: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 23 July 1914,
HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 251: Ford also complained: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 21 July 1914,
HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 251: Bee avowed his innocence: W. G. Bee to E. G. Liebold, 23 July 1914,
HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 251: Liebold, by the end of 1914: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 28 Decem
ber 1914, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-6.

page 252: another company, Gray & Davis: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 21 July
1914, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 252: Ford dealers also registered: E. G. Liebold to W. G. Bee, 25 July
1914, HFM & GYRC, Box 4, Folder 4-4.

page 252: Throughout the process: Ibid.
page 252: After Ford extended: Stephen B. Mambert to Henry Ford, 27 De

cember 1919, HFM & GYRC, Box 2, Folder 2-60.
page 253: Edison did not give up: W. H. Meadowcroft to E. G. Liebold, 13 Oc

tober 1919, HFM & GYRC, Box 5, Folder 5-4.
page 253: But later that year: Stephen Mambert to Henry Ford, 23 January

1918, HFM & GYRC, Box 16, Folder 52.
page 253: Having a personal friend: TAE to E. G. Liebold, 31 December 1917,

HFM & GYRC, Box 2, Folder 2-57.
page 253: The "little while": Stephen Mambert to Henry Ford, 7 March 1919,

HFM & GYRC, Box 16, Folder 52. For more payments that were not
deposited immediately, see also Stephen Mambert to Henry Ford, 12 May
1919, HFM & GYRC, Box 16, Folder 52.

page 253: There were other instances: Stephen B. Mambert to Henry Ford, 20
March 1918; Stephen B. Mambert to E. G. Liebold, 25 December 1922;
TAE to Henry Ford, 16 July 1924, all at HFM & GYRC, Box 16, Folder 52.

page 253: In 1925, Ford forgave: E. G. Liebold to Charles Edison, 25 Novem
ber 1925, HFM & GVRC, Box 6, Folder 6-1.

page 253: "the world's worst businessman": Ford, My Life and Work, 235.



350/ 

page 253: a camping vacation together: Firestone had accompanied the Ed
isons and the Fords in California in 1915. At the end of the California trip,
Edison had suggested that the group plan to camp together the next year.
Samuel Crowther, "My Vacations with Ford and Edison," System, May
1926, 643-645. Business and pleasure were intertwined not only for Edi
son and Ford but also for Firestone and Ford. In the middle of the series of

trips, Firestone solidified his business ties with Ford, signing an agreement
to supply 65 percent of the tires used by the Ford Motor Company.
Dorothy Boyle Huyck, "Over Hill and Dale with Henry Ford and Famous
Friends," Smithsonian, June 1978, 92.

page 254: The group traveled by car: John Burroughs to TAE and Harvey Fire
stone, 11 December 1916, HFM & GVRC, Vertical File-Ford, Henry
Camping.

page 254: Schedules could not be arranged: For mention of camping plans that
were not realized that year, see H. S. Firestone to TAE, telegram, 17 August
1917, HFM & GVRC, Box 2, Folder 2-56.

page 254: A contemporary feature article: Mary B. Mullett, "Four Big Men
Become Boys Again," American Magazine, February 1919. Firestone said
Edison would also frequently be found in the car reading. Samuel Crowther,
"Was There Another Vacation Like This?" System, June 1926, 793.

page 254: A trip diary: Harvey S. Firestone Jr. notes, followed by Harvey S.
Firestone Sr., notes, typescript copy at HFM & GVRC, Vertical File
Ford, Henry-Camping; original held in Vierce Library, University of
Akron, Firestone Collection.

page 254: Edison would take a midday nap: John Burroughs to TAE and Har
vey Firestone, 11 December 1916, HFM & GVRC, Vertical File-Ford,
Henry-Camping.

page 254: take up a newspaper: During President Harding's stay in camp, the
president's friend Bishop W. F. Anderson delivered a sermon. While the
president listened attentively, Edison "picked up a newspaper and buried
himself in it." "Harding in Camp with Noted Party; Chops Fire Wood,"
NYT, 24 July 1921.

page 255: the caravan had swollen: Josephson, Edison, 466.
page 255: Newsreels about the campers: David L. Lewis, The Public Image of

Henry Ford (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1976), 223.
page 255: A diary entry: Our Happy Days of 1919 and 1920, scrapbook, n.d.

[1921?], HFM & GVRC, Vertical File-Henry Ford-Camping, 12.
page 255: Burroughs wrote in his diary: Edward Renehan, John Burroughs:

An American Naturalist (Post Mills, Vt.: Chelsea Green, 1992),276; Neil
Baldwin, Henry Ford and the Jews (New York: Public Affairs, 2001),
88-89. Five years before the 1919 trip, Burroughs had spoken out and
called for a new trial in Georgia in the case of Leo Frank, the Jewish defen
dant hastily convicted of rape and murder (and the next year abducted
from the state prison farm and lynched). Burroughs also said that his posi-



\351

tion was shared by Edison and Ford as well, though they did not speak to
the press themselves. See "Favors New Frank Trial," NYI: 1 April 1914.

page 256: The president arrived: Karl G. Pearson to W. D. Hines, 23 Novem
ber 1931, cover letter and accompanying memo "Camping Trip Stories,"
original in Vierce Library, University of Akron Firestone Collection; copy
held in HFM & GVRC, Vertical Files: Henry Ford-Camping.

page 256: When the president offered: Samuel Crowther, "What Vacations
Have Taught Me About Business," System, July 1926,106; "Edison Prizes
Chewing Tobacco from Harding," NYI: 12 August 1922.

page 256: Something went wrong: Nelson Durand to TAE, 20 July 1925,
HFM & GVRC, Box 3, Folder 5.

page 257: Henry Ford took: Lewis, Public Image ofHenry Ford, 223.
page 257: he claimed in his memoirs: Ford, My Life and Work, 240.
page 257: Charles Sorensen: Charles Sorensen, My Forty Years with Ford

(New York: Norton, 1956), 18.
page 257: his daughter Madeleine: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History, 1 Decem

ber 1972, ENHS, Interview #1,28.
page 258: After our little walk: Edward L. Bernays, Biography of an Idea:

Memoirs of Public Relations Counsel Edward L. Bernays (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1965),451.

CHAPTER 12. LETTING GO

page 259: The Man Who Defeated Darkness: The honorific titles listed here
were heard at a single luncheon honoring Edison on the occasion of his
seventy-seventh birthday. "Edison Honored by Movie Leaders," NYI: 16
February 1924.

page 259: When an eighth-grader: William Meadowcroft to Earle Shopen, 13
December 1915, ENHS.

page 259: At the end of the experience: "Edison at 76, Talks of Tut-Ankh
Amen, also Ruhr and Girls," NYI: 13 February 1923; "Navy Ignored 45
Inventions, Edison Relates on Birthday," NYW, 13 February 1923.

page 260: One moving tribute: W. C. Lathrop to TAE, 6 March 1921, ENHS.
A copy of the letter is available online at the Library of Congress's American
Memory Web site: http://memory.loc.gov/learn/lessons/99/edison/images/
mrs2.gif. I am indebted to Leonard DeGraaf, the archivist at ENHS, for
bringing the letter to my attention.

page 260: a most gratifying letter: For another first-person testimonial that
credits wives' adoption of electrical appliances to increased availability to
attend to the needs of husbands, see Anne Walker, "Three of Us and
Electricity," Woman's Home Companion, December 1919. Walker, speak
ing for herself and two friends, writes, "We three wives have less time for
shopping, 'tea-ing,' and afternoon bridge, but we have lots more fun
evenings with our husbands-motor trips, sextet dinners, theatre parties
in town, and jolly games of cards."



352 / 

page 261: Edison wrote to a correspondent: TAE to J. E. Franklin, 12 Decem
ber 1916, ENHS.

page 262: When he had left Edison's side: Samuel InsulI, The Memoirs of
Samuel InsulI: An Autobiography, ed. Larry Plachno (Polo, Ill.: Trans
portation Trails, 1992), 59, 62, 66, 76.

page 262: new pricing schemes: InsulI, Memoirs, 73-74.
page 262: acquisition of neighboring utilities: Harold L. Platt, The Electric

City: Energy and the Growth of the Chicago Area, 1880-1930 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1991),253.

page 262: the spending of his wealth: Forrest McDonald, Insull (Chicago: Uni
versity of Chicago Press, 1962), 240-241, 245. The new building was
completed in the fall of 1929 and its first production staged ten days after
the market crash, an entirely different fiscal era from the one in which it
was conceived.

page 262: placed on the cover of Time: Cover, Time, 29 November 1926.
page 262: continued to make himself available: McDonald, InsulI, 238-239.
page 263: When asked in 1911: TAE to Port Huron Times-Herald, 1 April

1911, ENHS.
page 263: to his own town: H. F. Miller to L. B. Markwith, 2 May 1911, ENHS.
page 263: Aviation Section: TAE to Alan R. Hawley, 27 January 1916, ENHS.
page 263: "colored section": H. F. Miller to Chairman, Colored Branch Com-

mittee, YMCA, 8 May 1912, ENHS.
page 263: Essex County Jail: H. F. Miller to Samuel Golcher, 31 December

1913, ENHS.
page 263: New Jersey Soldiers' Relief Concert: TAE to Mrs. 1. M. Irwin, 18

July 1916, ENHS.
page 263: telegraph-skills tournament: Walter P. Phillips, Sketches Old and

New (New York: J. H. Bunnell, 1897), 181.
page 263: No to Oberlin: H. T. Miller to Chas. W. Williams, 9 June 1910,

ENHS, Letterbook, vol. 83.
page 263: Edison did not himself invest: Edison poured two experimental

buildings-a two-story gardener's cottage and a garage-on the grounds
of Glenmont and hired the New York firm of Mann & MacNeille to draw

up plans that Edison made available royalty free to any builder willing to
sell the completed house to "working men" at a price that capped the
builder's profits at 10 percent. Michael Peterson, "Thomas Edison's Con
crete Houses," Invention and Technology 11 (Winter 1996): 54, 55.

page 263: A New Jersey real estate investor: "Popularity of Concrete," New
York Tribune, 11 June 1911. At the same time that the only investor in his
concrete-home designs was using them as rental properties, Edison contin
ued to believe that he had developed a solution to working-class discontent
because the concrete home could be purchased by even a day laborer. Edi
son said, "Social discontent will die out when the working man owns his
own home." See "Night Simply to Be Abolished," Democrat (Madison,
WI), 27 July 1911.



\353

page 263: The only philanthropist: "Cement Houses as Toys," Morristown
Jerseyman, 6 January 1911.

page 264: Mina Edison's ideas: Mrs. Thomas A. Edison, "Leisure and Content
ment," Playground and Recreation 23 (January 1930): 607.

page 264: She and fellow members: "Mrs. Thos. A. Edison Makes Fight
Against Low Neck Ball Gowns," New York Evening World, 8 February
1916; "Women Divided in Attack on Low Neck Gowns That Stirs the Na
tion," Superior (Wis.) Telegram, 2 February 1916.

page 264: "Handsomely gowned women waited on": "Society Women Sell
Eggs; Open Store in Orange, NJ, and War On Grocers," Cumberland
[MD} Times, 20 November 1913.

page 264: The one philanthropic venture: "Boy, 16, Bishop's Son, Is Winner of
First Edison Scholarship," NYT, 3 August 1929.

page 265: At the time of the market crash: McDonald, lnsull, 284.
page 265: His personal fortune: Ibid., 277.
page 266: The prosecution's case: Ibid., 331-332.
page 266: He had told a State Department escort: Ibid., 44-45n38.
page 266: When environmental problems: William H. Hand, Oral History, 15

March 1973, ENHS, 13. Hand described how residents in the vicinity of
Edison's plant in Silver Lake would appear with dead animals, claiming
the deaths had been caused by pollution, and sought compensation. In one
instance, an angry crowd set fire to the laboratory on the property, de
stroying it. See Hand, 24.

page 266: One resident who lived across the street: Joseph F. McCoy, Notes, 31
March 1937, ENHS, Biographical Collection: Edison Associates, Contem
poraries, and Employees, Box 3, 18-19.

page 267: placed in the care of a French governess: Charles Edison, Oral His
tory, 14 April 1953, ENHS.

page 267: Charles's older sister, Madeleine: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History,
13 March 1973, ENHS, Interview #2,65.

page 268: She did sometimes wonder: Madeleine Sloane, Oral History, 1 De
cember 1972, ENHS, Interview #1, 24.

page 268: "Dear Fellow Criminal": Charles Edison to Edsel Edison, 6 June
1914, HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 8-15. A few months later, Charles
sent Edsel a box of Philip Morris cigarettes with a card that read, "Wish
ing you many happy returns of the habit." Walter Holland to Charles Edi
son, 8 November 1914, ENHS, Charles Edison Fund Collection, Charles
Edison Papers, Box 1, Correspondence 1912-1956.

page 268: Each of the three: William Maxwell, Edison Retail Sales Laboratory,
1915, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, Box 50, Thomas A.
Edison, Inc., Publications, 1.

page 268: The Edison Shop of East Orange: WM [William Maxwell] to Robert
Bolan, 22 October 1915, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Let
terbooks, Box 4,1915-1919.

page 269: Edison gave his approval: William Maxwell, Edison Retail Sales



354 / 

Laboratory, 1915, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, Box 50,
Thomas A. Edison, Inc., Publications, 1.

page 269: In September 1914: Charles Edison to Carolyn Hawkins, 29 Septem
ber 1914, ENHS, Charles Edison Fund Collection, Charles Edison Papers,
Box 1, Correspondence 1912-1956.

page 269: Without waiting, Edison boasted: TAE to George C. Silzer, 30 No
vember 1914, ENHS.

page 269: After three years of operation: Charles Edison to William Maxwell,
28 June 1917, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Letterbooks,
Box 4, 1915-1919. Charles had been unable to generate original ideas for
saving the shop. He clutched with desperation to the unpromising ideas of
others, suggesting phonograph recitals in nearby factories, catered "Porch
Parties," demonstrations staffed by Boy Scouts-and a "Concert Automo
bile." Charles Edison to Godfrey, 21 June 1916, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records,
Charles Edison's Letterbooks, Box 4,1915-1919. The "Concert Automo
bile" actually existed: a department store in Birmingham, Alabama, had
installed a large Edison phonograph in an electric car that was dispatched
around the city, providing mobile demonstrations. See William Maxwell to
Godfrey, 26 May 1916, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Letter
books, Box 4,1915-1919. The staff at Edison's lab had tried to connect a
phonograph to a car horn but the experiment had not produced satisfac
tory results. William Meadowcroft turned down a request for payment to
a correspondent who suggested the idea in 1913, well after it had already
been tried at the lab. William Meadowcroft to A. W. Smith, 22 November
1913, ENHS.

page 269: Maxwell was not concerned: William Maxwell to Charles Edison,
29 June 1917, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Letterbooks,
Box 4,1915-1919.

page 269: Maxwell himself had complained: Maxwell to Godfrey, 14 June
1916, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Letterbooks, Box 4,
1915-1919.

page 270: Charles did notice: Charles Edison, Oral History, 14 April 1953,
ENHS, 162.

page 270: had taken in a sight: Ibid., 135, 162, 164, 166.
page 271: The company's accident report: Accident report, 16 June 1914, ENHS.
page 271: When Thomas Edison departed for Washington: Charles Edison suf-

fered from severe hearing loss, which kept him out of active military
service during the war. He had an opportunity to tell Newton D. Baker, the
secretary of war, that he felt he should be in uniform, but Baker had said
no, Charles's father had been "drafted" and Charles could serve his coun

try best simply by "trying to operate the business," which had some con
tracts with the War Department. Charles Edison, Oral History, 14 April
1953, ENHS, 147.

page 271: Charles shortened the workday: Ibid., 166-168.



 \ 355

page 271: He was young enough: Charles Edison to Huber G. Buehler, 3 Feb
ruary 1919, ENHS, TAE Inc. Records, Charles Edison's Letterbooks, Box
4, 1915-1919.

page 271: As he felt his way: "My Experiences Working for Father," American
Magazine, August 1918, 33-35.

page 272: aware that he was regarded: Mina Edison to Charles Edison, 23 No
vember 1917, ENHS, Charles Edison Fund Collection, Charles Edison Pa
pers, Box 1, Correspondence 1912-1956.

page 272: While he and Carolyn Hawkins: "Mrs. Charles Edison Talks of
Navies, Peace, Hobbies, and a Novel Honeymoon," NYT, 19 February
1939.

page 272: Edison bestowed his approval: TAE to Charles Edison, [ca. 25 March
1918], ENHS, Charles Edison Fund Collection, Charles Edison Papers,
Box 2, Correspondence 1957-Memorial Book, Correspondence: No Date.

page 272: His father had no interest: Josephson, Edison, 454-455.
page 273: Edison ordered dismissals: Israel, Edison, 454.
page 273: "Merrily the axe swings": Charles Edison to TAE, 12 July 1926,

ENHS, cited in Andre Millard, Edison and the Business of Invention (Bal
timore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990), 294.

page 273: "What he'd do": A. E. Johnson and K. Ehricke, Oral History, 29
March 1971, ENHS, 19. One worker, Roderic Peters, was dismissed by
Edison soon after being hired, but he simply returned to his desk the next
day and carried on with his work as if nothing had happened. Edison gave
him critical looks, and after a couple of days, said to him, "I thought I let
you go." Peters merely smiled and said nothing. Edison let the matter drop
and Peters ended up working for him for four more years. See Roderic Pe
ters, Oral History, 23 March 1973, ENHS, 3.

page 273: drastically reducing employment: Israel, Edison, 455. The work
force was reduced most dramatically in the complex at Orange, dropping
from eight thousand workers during the war to about one thousand by
August 1921. See "Edison Club Peters Out," NYT, 6 August 1921.

page 273: All he cared about: "Edison Condemns the Primary School," NYT, 7
May 1921.

page 273: Thanks to an unsuccessful candidate: "Edison Questions Stir Up a
Storm," NYT, 11 May 1921. The 141 questions were exceeded by a list of
150 recalled by another unsuccessful candidate. See "Edison's Questions
Still Puzzle City," NYT, 12 May 1912.

page 274: The New York Times pointed out: "Grade XYZ," NYT, 8 May
1921. Another editorial praised the irreverence of the young woman who
refused to respond to Edison's exam questions seriously. Pig iron, she said,
was so named because "it is unrefined." See "Her Answer Proved Intelli

gence," NYT, 12 May 1912. This was followed by "Mr. Edison's Mistake
Is Revealed," NYT, 14 May 1921, which observed that Edison did not un
derstand what a college education was designed to accomplish.



356 / 

page 274: The Chicago Tribune: "Can't Answer Edison," NYT, 11 May 1921.
page 274: When Albert Einstein: "Einstein Sees Boston; Fails on Edison Test,"

NYT, 18 May 1921.
page 274: the annoying importuning: Paul Kasakove, untitled reminiscences,

n.d., ENHS. Kasakove, a Cornell graduate who had majored in chemistry,
tells a story about his first meeting with Edison as an applicant who had
replied to a help-wanted advertisement. Kasakove was accompanied by
the personnel manager and the plant superintendent, both of whom were
terrified of Edison. When the trio arrived at the door of Edison's labora

tory, the two managers fought over which one of them would get to stay
behind and which one would accompany Kasakove and face the wrath of
Edison should he judge the applicant to be unsuitable.

page 274: he needed the kind of manager: "Edison Answers Some of His Crit
ics," NYT, 23 October 1921.

page 275: When newspapers published: "Here Is Edison's 4-Column Sheaf of
Knowledge," NYT, 12 May 1921.

page 275: Edison was undaunted: "Edison Dashes Off New Questionnaire,"
NYT, 14 May 1921.

page 275: he was surprised to discover: "Edison at 76, Talks of Tut-Ankh
Amen, Also Ruhr and Girls."

page 2 75: Few businesspeople: "Mr. Edison's Questions; What Other Business
Men Think of College Educations As They Affect the Workaday World,"
NYT, 15 May 1921; "Controversy Rages over Edison Test," NYT, 15 May
1921; "More Slams at Edison," NYT, 22 May 1921. Edison did draw
some supportive letters to the editor, which were summarized in "Edison Is
Upheld by Many Writers," NYT, 19 May 1921.

page 275: In a letter to the editor: "Comments on Edison List," NYT, 13 May
1921.

page 275: Ford had initiated: "Seldom Reads Below Headlines, Ford Admits,"
NYT, 19 July 1919; "Odd Definitions Given by Ford in Libel Suit," NYT,
17 July 1919. One of the strange definitions that Ford gave was that for an
"idealist": "one who helps to make profits."

page 275: He gamely sat: "Edison's Son Fails in His Father's Test," NYT, 16
May 1921.

page 275: When he graduated: "Edison to Hire Son Without Usual Test,"
NYT, 12 June 1923.

page 276: Theodore was in no hurry: "Son Rejects Edison Job," NYT, 22 June
1923.

page 276: Theodore was put to work: Millard, Edison and the Business of In
vention,310.

page 276: By the end of 1921: "Broadcasting Broadway by Radio," NYT, 1
January 1922.

page 276: Edison did feel slighted: Erik Barnouw, A Tower in Babel: A History
of Broadcasting in the United States (New York: Oxford University Press,
1966-1970), 84.



 \357

page 277: held to a different explanation: Theodore M. Edison, Oral History,
7 May 1970, ENHS, Transcript of tapes #45-46.

page 277: Edison's sentimental attachment: "Edison Still Busy on the Phono
graph," NYI: 19 July 1922.

page 277: he had no wish to reopen: "Edison Calls Radio a Failure for Music:
Thinks Phonograph Will Regain Its Own," NYI: 23 September 1926. Un
derlining the usefulness of radio for purposes other than musical pro
grams, Edison did tune in to a radio broadcast of the Dempsey-Tunney
fight in 1926, which he was too deaf to hear. He had to rely upon family
members to summarize what had transpired at the end of each round.
"Radio Satisfactory on Bout, Edison Says," NYI: 25 September 1926.
Defending the quality of musical broadcasts, the nascent radio industry
offered expert testimony to rebut Edison's claims. See "Broadcasters Dis
agree with Electrical Wizard," NYI: 3 October 1926.

page 277: "We would not for a moment": TAE to Frank Coombs,S May
1924, HFM & GVRC, Box 3, Folder 3-1.

page 277: When manufacturers introduced: Ronald C. Tobey, Technology As
Freedom: The New Deal and the Electrical Modernization of the Ameri
can Home (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 22-23.

page 277: The "radio fad": "Edison Calls Radio a Failure for Music: Thinks

Phonograph Will Regain Its Own." A few months later, Edison was willing
to grant that radio might not disappear, but he had a new criticism: listen
ers' aesthetic sense would be damaged. "Undistorted music in time will
sound strange to those brought up on radio music," he predicted, "and
they will not like the real thing." "Thomas A. Edison Sees a Menace for
Music in the Radio," Musician, January 1927, 12.

page 277: Edicraft Automatic Toaster: Products of Thomas A. Edison Indus
tries, 1929, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, Box 51, Thomas
A. Edison, Inc. (McGraw-Edison), 56.

page 278: customers did not want to see: Walter K. Porzer Associates, Inc., re
port, August 1931, ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, Box 2,
Edicraft Division (TAE, Inc.), Sales and Marketing Evaluation Book, 25.

page 278: pay premium prices: Edward Cary, Oral History, 6 June 1973,
ENHS,15.

page 278: Ford and Firestone provided: William H. Hand, Oral History, 15
March 1973, ENHS, 32.

page 278: The official history: Norman Speiden, transcript of ENHS tour,
8 January 1971, ENHS, 27-28.

page 278: radiation exposure: Israel, Edison, 422.
page 278: employee of the Fort Myers laboratory: William H. Hand, Oral His

tory, 15 March 1973, ENHS, 34-37.
page 279: they set up a research group: Theodore M. Edison, Oral History,

7 May 1970, ENHS, Transcript of tapes #45-46.
page 279: On 9 October 1929: Charles Edison to TAE, 9 October, 1929, ENHS,

Edison Family Papers, Series II, Edison, Charles-Charles Edison to TAE.



358 / 

page 279: Thomas A. Edison, Inc., announced: "Drops Records for Radio,"
NYT, 8 November 1929.

page 280: The sales literature: "Edison Radio with Light-O-Matic Tuning,"
typescript, n.d., ENHS, Primary Printed-Edison Companies, Box 49,
Folder: Catalogue of Products.

page 280: A year later, Charles and Theodore: Charles Edison to TAE, 16 Oc
tober 1930, PTAED, B037ACM. By 1930, the business slump forced the
company to layoff staff, including Frank Schell, who was credited for
originating the Edison scholarship contest. Charles Edison also lost his pri
vate secretary. See "Edison Industries Cut Staff; Scholarship Idea Man
Goes," NYT, 27 September 1930.

page 280: In 1923, Edison was credited: "Value of Edison's Genius Is Put
at Fifteen Billions," NYT, 24 June 1923. The casual methodology be
hind these deceptively crisp numbers is suggested with a comparison: four
years earlier, Edison was credited with creating industries worth only
$1 billion. See "Edison, 72, Denies He Is Growing Old," NYT, 11 Febru
ary 1919.

page 281: conducted in 1922: "Edison Greatest Man, Epworth League Votes,"
NYT, 25 November 1922. The story did not mention a fact that may have
influenced some of the voters in the church's poll: Mina Edison was a
member of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Earlier in the year, on the oc
casion of Edison's seventy-fifth birthday, reporters asked Edison, "Who is
the greatest man in the world?" He had said he spent his time in the labo

ratory and had not met many candidates for the title, but allowed that he
had once met and "liked" Theodore Roosevelt. See "Edison at 75 Still a
Two-Shift Man," NYT, 12 February 1922.

page 281: Ford famously declared: "History Is Bunk, Says Henry Ford," NYT,
29 October 1921.

page 281: He began plans to build: "The Museum Is Born: A Brief History,"
The Henry Ford, http://www.thehenryford.org/museum/henryford.asp.
What had been named The Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village
has shortened its name to simply "The Henry Ford."

page 281: seven railcars: "Edison Young Again As He Relives Past in Old Lab
oratory," NYT, 21 October 1929.

page 281: President Herbert Hoover: "Light's Gold Jubilee Honors Thomas Edi
son and Dedicates a Museum," The Henry Ford, http://www.thehenryford
.org/exhibits/pic/2004/october.asp.

page 282: When the party returned: "Edison Tries to Flee Dinner; Returns
When Wife Insists," NYT, 22 October 1929.

page 282: He made a public speech: "Edison Accepts Honor As Paid to His Life
Purpose, Advancing Human Understanding and Happiness," NYT, 22
October 1929. The Henry Ford provides online the recording made of Edi
son's speech at the Light's Golden Jubilee; see http://www.thehenryford.org/
exhibits/pic/2004/jubilee/Edison_Speech.mp3.



\359



page 283: personal total to 1,093: For lists of Edison's patents, grouped
chronologically and by subject, see the Edison Papers's Web site: http://
edison.rutgers.edu/patents.htm. Edison's reluctance to share credit with
others is suggested by the following: For almost his entire career, beginning
with work at his shop in Newark, he depended on the assistance-and
inventiveness-of others. Yet among his 1,093 patents, in apparently only
20 instances did he share credit with a joint inventor. See the listing at About
.com: http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/bledisonpatents.htm.

page 283: When Mina Edison's sister: TAE to Mina Edison, 1 December 1898,
PTAED, B037ABU.

page 283: he explained he did just fine: "Edison Assails Underthinking and
Overeating," Herald Tribune, 24 December 1930.

page 283: This conviction arose: Allen L. Benson, "Edison Sees the 200-Year
Old Man," Dearborn Independent, 14 March 1925.

page 284: He was the same medical authority: "'You Don't Feel Pinched Any
where, Do You?' Asked Mr. Edison," Boston American, 12 June 1916.

page 284: In August 1931, he collapsed: "World Followed News of His Ill
ness," NYT, 18 October 1931.

page 284: "mentally drowsy": "Edison Has Good Day, but Vitality Ebbs,"
NYT, 5 October 1931.

page 284: In the early morning: "Thomas Edison Dies in Coma at 84; Family
with Him As the End Comes," NYT, 18 October 1931.

page 284: "genius" was credited: Ibid.
page 284: The governor of New Jersey: "10,000 Mourners Pass Edison's Bier

in Day; Nation Plans Tribute at Burial Tomorrow," NYT, 20 October
1931.

page 285: was told of Edison's death: Jehl, Reminiscences, 318-319. Sources
differ on the reason Ott had been confined to a wheelchair. Either he had
suffered a stroke ("Retired Edison Aide Dies," NYT, 20 October 1931) or
had fallen down an empty elevator shaft at Bergmann's shop (Nerney, Edi
son, 299).

page 285: When Mary Childs Nerney: Nerney, Edison, 64-65.
page 285: Declining the offer: "10,000 Mourners Pass Edison's Bier in Day."
page 285: forty thousand the second: "Nation to Be Dark One Minute Tonight

After Edison Burial," NYT, 21 October 1931.
page 285: President Hoover asked: Ibid.

page 285: Edison really had been privileged to hear: "Edison Is Buried on 52nd
Anniversary of Electric Light," NYT, 22 October 1931.

page 286: That night, the two radio networks: "Lights of City Dimmed in
Homage to Edison; the Nation Joins in the Brief Silent Tribute," NYT, 22
October 1931.

page 286: Thomas Edison Jr.: "T. A. Edison Jr. Dies; Son of Inventor, 59,"
NYT, 26 August 1936.



360/NoTES

page 286: maintained a laboratory: "Older Son to Sue to Void Edison Will,"
NYT, 31 October 1931.

page 286: died in 1937: "William Leslie Edison," biography prepared for me
morial service, n.d., HFM & GVRC, Box 8, Folder 37.

page 286: died in 1969: "Charles Edison, 78, Ex-Governor of Jersey and u.S.
Aide, Is Dead," NYT, 1 August 1969.

page 286: died in 1992: "Theodore M. Edison; An Illustrious Father Guided
Inventor, 94," NYT, 26 November 1992.

page 286: reference to the "Illustrious Father": Ibid.

page 286: both sons gave away: Charles Edison established the Charles Edison
Fund when he was fifty-eight, to which he donated the bulk of his estate.
See Charles Edison Fund, http://www.charlesedisonfund.org/edison.html.
Theodore Edison donated half of his inheritance to the employees of
Thomas A. Edison Industries. Josephson, Edison, 469n. Theodore also
was a major supporter of efforts in the 1950s to preserve an endangered
stand of bald cypress trees in southwest Florida. See "Theodore M. Edi
son; An Illustrious Father Guided Inventor, 94."

page 287: His scholarship program: Four years after Edison's death, the
Thomas Alva Edison Foundation, formed to "perpetuate the name of the
inventor," was incorporated in an attempt to raise funds for an endowment
that would provide permanent support of a resuscitated scholarship pro
gram in Edison's name. "Edison's Aid Carried On," NYT, 24 June 1935.
The fund-raisers apparently did not succeed, however. When the very first
scholarship had been awarded in 1929, New York mayor Jimmy Walker
had offered a grand oration: "When we are dead, when our children and
grandchildren are no more, his name will remain as one of the greatest in
the country. The present fine scholarship contest is the sort of thing one
would almost expect from a Thomas A. Edison." See "Boy, 16, Bishop's
Son, Is Winner of First Edison Scholarship," NYT, 3 August 1929.

page 287: valued at $12 million: "Edison Left 2 Sons Bulk of $12,000,000,"
NYT, 30 October 1931.

page 287: Ford Foundation's endowment: "Ford Foundation Owns

$108,913,234," NYT, 22 April 1947.
page 287: $70 million estate: "Ford Tax Indicates $70,000,000 Estate," NYT,

29 October 1948.

page 287: Four years later: "Edison's Estate Is Valued at $2,871,758," NYT,
27 June 1935.

page 287: reduced by 50 percent: "Edison Estate $1,500,432," NYT, 21 April
1937.

page 287: This arrangement spared her: Mina's stepson William Edison threat
ened publicly to sue his younger half brothers, Charles and Theodore, but
was persuaded to drop the idea. "Older Son to Sue to Void Edison Will";
"Edison Sons Avoid Fight over Estate," NYT, 26 February 1932.

page 287: Four years after Edison's death: "Widow of Edison to Be Wed

Today," NYT, 30 October 1935.



\361

page 287: She was widowed again: "Mrs. Edison Dead; Inventor's Widow,"
NYT, 25 August 1947. The obituary noted that she had "stirred up a
minor squabble" in a radio speech given in 1930 when she urged women
"to return to home-making and pay less attention to business." She had
made similar remarks in preceding years, but "times had changed" and she
drew many "replies" that clearly took a dissenting view.

page 288: Charles Edison arranged: "Edison-McGraw Merger Forms Electri
cal Giant," NYT, 3 January 1957.

page 288: McGraw-Edison was absorbed: "Cooper Industries Inc. Purchase,"
Wall Street Journal, 4 June 1985.

page 288: poll of Chinese: "In Beijing Students' Worldview, Jordan Rules,"
NYT, 16 June 1998. The results of the survey should not be generalized:
the survey population was only one thousand respondents.

page 288: Shunpei Yamazaki: Yamazaki's first patent was filed in 1980, so he
passed Edison at a pace that exceeded Edison's by far. Another prolific in
ventor, Donald E. Weder, has accumulated more than thirteen hundred
without becoming a celebrity. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office pro
vides online access to its patent database at http://www.uspto.gov/patft/
index.html.

page 289: When a young John Lawson: John Lawson to TAE, 6 January 1879,
PTAED, D7913B.

page 290: One of his employees: A. E. Johnson and K. Ehricke, Oral History,
29 March 1971, ENHS, 20.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

THE
EDITORS OF the Thomas A. Edison Papers Project deserve

sanctification. They have brought talent, expertise, and patience
to a vast project that is not yet complete: making the corpus of

documents that Edison collected during his long life easily accessible to
scholars, students, and the general public. The principal repository of
Edison's papers, the Edison National Historic Site, in West Orange,
New Jersey, contains an estimated 5 million documents-a rough guess
because a complete inventory even now has yet to be completed.
Thanks to the Edison Papers Project, however, many tools are available
for excavating nuggets from any portion of the collection.

The first five volumes of the projected fifteen-volume set of The Pa
pers of Thomas A. Edison have appeared, and they are modern won
ders. I am grateful for the prodigious work that was poured into
preparing the introductions, timelines, bibliographies, headnotes, and
endnotes, which make them a model of contemporary scholarship.

I also was most fortunate to be able to gain access to nearly 180,000
Edison documents while sitting at home-the Project's easily searchable
Web site came online shortly before I began my research. What a boon!

I would like to singly thank Paul Israel, the current director of the
Edison Papers Project; former director Robert Rosenberg; and staff edi
tors Theresa Collins and Brian Shipley, all of whom provided assistance
to me in the course of research.

362



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS\363

Not all of the Edison papers are yet available online. I would like to

thank Leonard DeGraaf, Doug Tarr, and other staff members at the
Edison National Historical Site for their help when I paid my visits to
the archives at a busy time, during the year before the site was closed
for renovation, as well as when I requested assistance with follow-up
requests. I also was assisted by the staff of the Benson Ford Research
Center at the Henry Ford, the new umbrella name encompassing the

Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village, in Dearborn, Michigan.
The College of Business of San Jose State University gave generous,

recurring gifts in the form of reduced teaching assignments, as well as fi
nancial support for a full year's leave. During the book's seven-year ges
tation, San Jose State administrators and faculty colleagues displayed
imperturbable patience, at least in my presence, for which I am most
appreciative.

The scholarly resources of Stanford University contributed much to
the project. I am grateful for visiting scholar appointments over two
years arranged by James Sheehan, chair of the department of history,
and Tim Lenoir, director of the Program in History and Philosophy of
Science. At Stanford's Archive of Recorded Sound, Richard Koprowski
and Aurora Perez provided cheerful help.

Madeleine Sloane and David Sloane met with me and generously
shared memories of their paternal grandmother, Madeleine Sloane, ne
Edison, and family lore.

My interlibrary loan requests were voluminous and must have cre
ated grievously lopsided accounts between borrowing and lending li
braries. But Mary Munill, at Stanford, and Kara Fox and Shirley
Miguel, at San Jose State, were unstinting in their work on my behalf.

Bonnie Newburg, of the Edison & Ford Winter Estates, and Ruth
Ann Nyblod, of the United States Patent and Trademark Office, pro
vided swift help with my queries. Jack Curlin supplied information
about his grandfather that tied up a loose end. Martin Sheehan-Stross
helped with library research.

The manuscript was much improved by the unsparing critiques sup
plied by Gail Hershatter and Pamela Basey, who flagged inconsistencies



364/ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

and forced me to look anew at the most basic assumptions embedded in
the first draft.

As always, my agent, Elizabeth Kaplan, knew what I needed at any
given point-a matter of intuition, as I often did not know myself until
her assistance appeared.

At Crown, Emily Loose was extremely knowledgeable about Edison
and this period of history; her enthusiasm for the project fired my own.
Her successor, Luke Dempsey, has unusually sharp ears as well as eyes
and gave the manuscript a gloriously old-fashioned close reading. I am
grateful to both.

Jim Gullickson made countless corrections in the course of careful

copy-editing. Lindsey Moore kept us all on schedule.
This work is dedicated to my most important collaborator, Ellen

Stross. Her editorial suggestions made the book immeasurably better
and considerably shorter.



IN 0 EX

Academy of Mount Saint Vincent, 64-65
acoustic telegraphy, 23
Adams, Henry, 47
Adams, James, 30, 35
Adirondack Mountains, 254
Adrian, Michigan, 6, 293
advertising, electrified, 128
alternating current

dangers of, 122, 172, 174-175, 176, 180,
182

defense of, 177-178
Edison licensees' wish for, 171, 183

American, 272
American Association for the Advancement of

Science, 69, 73
American Bell Telephone Company, 146
American Gas-light Association, 84
American Graphophone Company, 156-157
American Novelty Company, 22-23, 298
American Telegraph Works, 13, 14
American Tobacco Company, 241
Anderson, W. E, 350
Ann Street, 123
Ansonia, Connecticut, 78
Apple Computer, 289
Apple Pies, 229
Appleton, Wisconsin, 132-133, 138
arc lights, 126, 127, 173
Armat, Thomas, 207-208, 209
Armstrong, Louis, 224
Arnold, Constable & Company, 326
Association of Edison Illuminating Companies,

183,233
Astor Library, 93
Atlanta, Georgia, 208
Atlantic and Pacific Telegraph Company, 20
Atlantic Monthly, 161, 162
Auburn, New York, 184
Automatic Phonograph Exhibition Company,

195
automatic telegraphy, 18-19

Baker, Newton D., 354
Baltimore Gas Company, 104
bamboo hunters, 109-110
Barker, George

electric light demonstration, 86-88
Maxim's bulbs, praise for, 111
phonograph demonstration, 56
trip West with Edison, 69, 71, 73
visit to Wallace workshop, 78-79

Barnum, P. T., 2, 61,224,292
Batchelor, Charles

Edison, comments about, 66
Edison Lamp Company, 120
as Edison's proxy, 56, 67, 70, 86, 87, 106
at Edison's side, 57, 65, 93
electric light, 75, 78, 96
electric pen, 19

finding Schenectady site, 169
helmets for Blaine-Logan parade, 144
Menlo Park, descriptions of, 20
Office Door Attachment, 23
phonograph,29-31,35,36
recreation,45

Baum, Frank, 197
Bedloe's Island, 49
Bee, William, 236, 239, 248-249, 250-252
Beethoven, 221
Bell, Alexander Graham

acoustic telegraphy, 23
and Edison, 24, 38, 157
father-in-law Gardiner Hubbard, 52
graphophone,38,156
telephone, 2, 23-25, 27, 32

Benedict, William, 271
Bergh, Henry, 176
Bergmann & Company, 120
Bergmann, Sigmund, 120, 133, 139, 167
Berlin University, 93
Bernays, Edward, 257-258
BernhardSarah,98-100,223-224,316
Betamax, 171

365



366/INDEX

Bijou Theatre, 139
Black Maria, 199,202,204,207,210
Blacksmith Scene, 197
Blaine-Logan presidential campaign, 144
Bliss, George, 298
Bloomberg News, 15
Blue Mountain House, 125
Boston Edison Company, 267
Boston, Massachusetts, 7, 8, 13, 16
Boston Tech [Massachusetts Institute of Tech-

nology],267
Boulevard des Capucines, 67
Bowdoin College, 93, 123
boxing, 199, 201-205, 207, 210
Brady, Mathew, 61
BranneJohn, 110,318
Braudy, Leo, 292
Brice, Fanny, 224
Broadway

accidental electrocution, 172-173
first kinetoscope parlor, 200
Heller's magic show, 45
lighting by Brush Electric, 112-113, 114,

125

posthumous tribute to Edison, 286
Brooklyn American District Telegraph Com-

pany,331
Brooklyn Citizen, 176
Brooklyn Daily Eagle, 85
Brown, Mr. and Mrs. James, 131
Brush, Charles, 77, 85
Brush Electric Light Company

absence at Barker's demonstration, 88
in Detroit, Michigan, 127, 172
fatal accident, 122
lighting on Broadway, 112-113, 114, 125
overhead wires, 121
terms of New York lighting contract, 116

Bryant, William Cullen, 52
Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show, 213
bugs, 43, 88, 304
Burbank, Luther, 246
Burlington, New Jersey, 242
Burroughs, John, 254, 255-256, 350-351
Butler, Benjamin, 32-33

Canal Street, 121
capital punishment, 173-174, 176-177,

184-186,330
Carmencita, 200
Caruso, Enrico, 223, 224
Case, Anna, 224
Casson, Herbert N., 237
Castle, Vernon and Irene, 226
celebrity

commercialization of portrait, 61
Edison, press's demands upon, 44, 50, 51

Edison's acknowledgment of fame, 150,
151,210,290

Edison's correspondence with strangers, 55,
235

Edison's fame, arrival of, 10
endowed with extraordinary powers, 44-45,

58

fans, managing, 343-344
history of, 1-2, 292
image management, 88,217
privacy, loss of, 73,238, 245
regarded as omniscient expert, 63-64, 239

Centre Street, 178
Chambers Street, 178
Chandler, Charles, 78
Chatty Cathy, 163
Chautauqua Institution, 68, 69, 148, 150
Chautauqua Lake, New York, 68, 148
Cheever, Charles, 52
Chicago Arc Light and Power Company, 262
Chicago Central Phonograph Company, 334
Chicago, Illinois, 262, 265
Chicago Tribune, 60,274,275
Chicago World's Fair. See World's Columbian

Exposition
Chickering Hall, 24
Chinnock, Charles, 137-138
Christian Herald & Signs of Our Times, 16
Christopher Street, 204
Cincinatti, Ohio, 6
Clarke, Charles, 123, 124
Cleveland, Ohio, 77
Coburn, Mrs. Andrew, 56
Cochrane, Thomas, 158
Cockfight, 200
Coffin, Charles, 186
Columbia, 106, 107
Columbia Broadcasting Company, 286
Columbia Phonograph Company, 219, 220,

226
Columbia University, 78, 321
Commercial Club, 245
Concert Automobile, 354
Coney Island, 233
Consolidated Edison, 320-321
Coolidge, Calvin, 256-257
Cooper Industries, 288
Corbett, James, 203-204, 205, 210
Cornell University, 356
Cortland, New York, 42
Cortot, Alfred, 223
Cotton States and International Exposition,

208
Council of Jewish Women, 225
Courtney, Peter, 203, 204, 205, 210
Cowan, Thomas, 276-277
Craig, Daniel, 19, 62-63



INDEX\367

Croffut, William
April Fool's Day parody, 54-55
on Edison's finances, 145
gift of stock from Edison, 92
on Railway Telegraph and Telephone,

146-147

seeking invitation to visit, 37, 68
seeking letter from Edison, 62-63

Crystal Palace Electric Exhibition, 128
Cummings, Amos, 37,44,47-50,51
Curie, Marie, 281
Curlin, Lemuel Calvert, 246-247
Cushing, Jack, 202
Custer, George Armstrong, 71

Dalhart, Vernon, 224
Darwin, Charles, 302-303
David Copperfield, 48
Davy, Humphry, 76, 77
de Moleyns, Frederick, 78
de Pachmann, Vladimir, 223
Dearborn, Michigan, 238, 281
Delmonico's Restaurant, 115, 143, 167,200
Dempsey-Tunney bout, 357
Denver Tribune, 108
Department of Public Works, 113
Des Moines, Iowa, 167,217,225
Detroit, Michigan, 127
Detroit Times, 218
Dickson, William Kennedy Laurie, 196, 198,

199,202,206,335
direct current, 122, 171, 174, 176, 180, 183
Dolan, Thomas, 158
Domestic Telegraph Company, 13
Dow, Alexander, 233
Drexel Building, 133
Drexel, Morgan & Company, 90
Dun & Company, R.G., 14, 89-90
Dunkirk, New York, 42
duplex telegraphy, 17

Eaton, Sherburne, 123-124
Edicraft automatic toaster, 277-278

Ediphone,261
Edison and His Inventions, 15
Edison and Murray, 13
Edison and Unger, 13, 14
Edison, Beatrice, 250
Edison, C. M., 211, 214
Edison, Charles

arranging merger for Thomas A. Edison,
Inc.,288

birth,191
death,286
Edison Shop of East Orange, 268-270
and Edsel Ford, 268, 353
education,267

embrace of radio, 276-277, 279-280
Ford, gifts from, 242
hearing disability, 354
marriage, 272
philanthropy, 286-287, 360
working with father, 267-273, 280

Edison Chemical Company, 211-212, 214
Edison Chicago, 262
Edison Darkey, 144
Edison Day, 244
Edison Electric Light Company

65 Fifth Avenue, 117-118
Bulletin of the Edison Electric Light Com

pany,124
centralized lighting, 128, 132, 138-139
competitive failures, 136-138, 167, 171,

181,330-331
delays in launching service, 126
demonstration for New York Board of Al-

dermen, 114-116
door-to-door canvassing, 128-129
Egisto Fabbri, director, 102
electric meters, 134-135, 136
on electric shocks, 122-124
employees supporting Blaine-Logan, 144
founding, 90-92
Francis Upton's equity share, 95
friction with Edison, 146
gas companies, counterattack upon, 124
investors, business strategies of, 87, 138
isolated lighting, 125, 126, 129, 138
and J. P. Morgan, 130-132, 136
Lower Manhattan, securing rights to, 112,

116
Pearl Street station, 132-133, 134
prospects, 96
real estate costs, 119

recapitalization, 103
reluctance to invest, 119, 120, 154
service, initial, 135-136
service, profitability of, 137-138
shareholders, 94, 314
stock, 92, 97, 103, 105, 146
support for expansion of laboratory, 114
underground conduits, safety of, 121, 123,

179
and William Vanderbilt, 129-130
at World's Industrial and Cotton Centennial

Exposition, 148
Edison Employment Bureau, 342
Edison General Electric Company, 182, 183,

186,190,333
Edison Illuminating Company in Detroit, 233,

234
Edison Jr. Steel and Iron Process Company,

213-214
Edison Lamp Company, 120



36B/INDEX

Edison Lamp Works, 128
Edison Machine Works, 119, 168, 169
Edison, Madeleine, 153,191,221-222,248,

257,267-268
Edison Manufacturing Company, 201
Edison, Marion, 16,74,143,149-150,153
Edison, Mary Stillwell

attempts to domesticate husband, 107-108
courtship of, 15-16,295
death,143
discretionary spending, 20
half of "perfect couple," 65-66
illness, 72-73,121
as lab assistant, 45
pregnancy,69
and Sarah Bernhardt, 99
surprise party for Edison, 296

Edison, Mina Miller
Edison's courtship of, 148-151
Edison's love letters to, 192, 208
on Edison's solitary life, 238
Fords, gifts from, 242-243
Glenmont, 152, 155,287
as lab assistant, 152
life after Edison's death, 287
marriage, 151-152
Methodist Episcopal Church, member of,

358
observed waiting for husband, 245
oversight of Charles Edison's career, 267, 272
provides alibi for Edison, 204
rescuing papers from fire, 231
speeches,361
support when Edison's health failed, 282
and Tom Jr., 212
volunteer activities, 264

Edison, Nancy, 3,4
Edison Phonograph Monthly, 223
Edison Phonograph Works, 219, 222
Edison Portland Cement Company, 243
Edison, Samuel, 3,294,295
Edison Scholarship, 264-265
Edison Shop of East Orange, 268-270
Edison Speaking Phonograph Company, 39,

42-43,52-53,60,61,84
Edison Storage Battery Company, 236, 253
Edison Telephone Company of Glasgow, 120
Edison, Theodore

death,286
development of radio, 279-280
on father's hearing loss, 277
at MIT, 275-276
philanthropy, 360
recipient of gift of car, 242

Edison, Thomas Alva
at 65 Fifth Avenue, 117-118
absentmindedness,66

aerophone, 41,49, 50-51
alternating current, on dangers of, 173, 179,

180

alternating current, reluctant developer of,
183-184

ambition, 80, 81,154,189,191,261
American Novelty Company, 22-23
animals, electrical experiments on, 175-176
anti-Semitism, 236-237, 255
appearance, 21-22,48, 103-104, 107-108,

114,115
appropriation of ideas of others, 157
atheism,305
autodidact,4
automatic telegraphy, 18-19,80
battery development, 216-217, 220,

227-228,236,237-238,250-252
"begging letters" to, 55-56, 67-68, 73-74
Bell, spurning collaboration with, 157
Bergmann & Company, 120
boxing, interest in, 202, 204, 357
boyhood,3-6
business, self-exile from, 229-230
bust of, 200
on capital punishment, 173-174
chafing under Insull's instructions, 183-184
color television, envisioning, 198
commercial orientation, 8, 163
commercial reputation, 89-90, 165, 187,

214
concrete houses, 228, 241-242, 263-264,

352

concrete, virtues of, 218,339,342-343
courtship of Mary Stillwell, 15-16,295
courtship of Mina Miller, 148-151
cylinders, resistance to abandoning,

219-220

death,284
delegating managerial responsibilities, 137,

138,168
as diarist, 149-150
diet, 64, 283-284
direct current, advocate for, 171-172, 174,

183

discouragement, rare expression of, 168, 183
economic impact of inventions, 280, 287, 358
Edison Electric, friction with directors of, 154
Edison Electric, holdings in, 120, 181-182
Edison Scholarship, 264
electric car, 216-217, 250
electric light, loss of interest in, 182, 188
electric meters, 134-135
electric motors, 80
electric pen, 19,22, 38, 144
electric railroad, 108
on electric shocks, 123-124,332
on electrocution, 173, 177, 186



INDEX \ 369

employees, firing, 273, 355
employees, negotiations with, 95, 168
estate, 287, 360
etheric force, 46-47, 305
ethics,266
eulogies for, 284-286
Ezra Gilliland, betrayal by, 159-160
financial difficulties, 32, 119, 145, 167, 181,

193
fire surrounding laboratory, 230-231, 243
flying machine, 80
Ford, business relationship with, 236,

237-238,243-244,247,250-253
Ford, camping trips with, 253-257, 350
Ford, friendship with, 160,235,238,

246-247,257-258,282
in Fort Myers, 151,238
gas light, campaign against, 85-86, 129
George Westinghouse, antipathy toward,

173,175,176
gifted assistants, difficulty with, 166
gifts from Ford, 242-243
happiness, 192,230
health, 40, 73,89,121,283-284
hearing aid for others, 60, 74
hearing and business, 221-222, 277
hearing and nonbusiness relationships,

9-10,57,65,78-79
hearing difficulties, origins of, 293
Henry Villard, pursuit of, 155-156
on higher education, 273, 274-275
honors, 259, 260-261
hustler, favoring the, 10,247
Inductorium, 18
injuries from research, 89
inventions, unrealized ideas for, 155-156
isolation of, 21, 22, 194,205,208,238
jokes,208
kinetograph, 198-199
kinetoscope, 195-201,205,208
life purpose, 163-164
at Light's Golden Jubilee, 281-282
liquidity, 190
loan repayments, 253
love letters to Mina Edison, 192, 208
managing, lack of interest in, 146
Marion Edison, with, 149-150
on marketing, 53
marriage to Mary Stillwell, 15-16,65-66,

296

marriage to Mina Miller, 151-152
Mary Edison, mourning, 143
mental-fitness test of applicants, 273-276,

355

mining, 74,182,189-193,204,208
motion picture projection, 197-198,

205-207,208-209

motion pictures, opinions on use of, 198,
199,228-229,342

Mr. Edison at Work in His Chemical Labo

ratory,210
musical preferences, 220-221, 222-223,

223-226
musical stars, reluctance to sign, 223,

224-226

name, continuity of, 287-288
name, disappearance of, 187-188,288
name, licensing of, 157, 163
name, marketing of, 209, 217-218, 219,

226,280
name, protection of, 211-212, 214,

215-216,230,342
name recognition, 280-281, 288
naps, 121, 254, 283
on Naval Consulting Board, 259-260
in New Orleans, 147-148
New York City, negotiating with, 113, 116,

121-122
Newark laboratory, 19,25,85
and North American Phonograph Company,

159

opinions of, 63-64, 107, 110,240
opportunity costs paid, 193-194, 205, 216
optimisitic disposition, 231-232
organized labor, circumventing, 329, 339
partnerships, 13, 14
patent, aerophone, 51
patent collecting, 80, 162,283, 359
patent, vote recorder, 8
patents, motion pictures, 197
patents, phonograph, 36, 38, 86, 156
Pearl Street station, beginning of service,

133

pecuniary motivation, 60, 108, 136-137
Pedder house, purchase of, 152-153
perfectionism, 160
philanthropy, 263-265
phonograph dealers, irritation with his,

225-226,227
phonograph, lack of interest in, 217
phonograph, opinions on use of, 162, 194,

199,220,261
phonograph, underestimation of impor

tance,300
pollution, disregard of, 266, 353
popular music, exasperation over, 222-223,

227

posthumous tributes to, 284-286
pranks, 7,109,294
in public, 57, 64-65, 103-105, 115
public image, diminished, 144, 156
quadruplex,17-18
radio, resistance to, 47,276-277,279-280,

357



370/INDEX

Edison, Thomas Alva (cont.)
Railway Telegraph and Telephone Company,

146-147

recreation, 45-46,98,148-149,192,194
reliance upon others, 166
reluctance to share control, 261, 266-267,

272-273
resistance to advice, 60-61, 171,226
risk, aversion to, 265
Roosevelt, Theodore, liked, 358
rubber research, 278-279
in San Francisco, 244-246
seeking investors, 155-156
sewing machine, 38
sharing equity, 95, 170,289
siphoning profits to support lab, 170
spectator, dislike of role of, 139
spoofs of, 54-55, 67
stress, 89
subordinates fear of, 356
tasimeter, 69
telegrapher, 5-9
telegraphic inventions, 7, 8-9, 13-20
telephone, 24-28, 28-29, 30-31, 32, 38
telephonoscope, 50, 51
telescopophon, 66-67
Thomson-Houston, resistance to merger

with, 186-187
threats against, 245, 266
and tobacco, 88,240-241,242,256,345
and Tom, Junior, 212, 214, 215, 216
vote recorder, 8
W. L. K. Dickson, failure to retain, 206
and Wall Street, 103, 193,237
and Warren Harding, 256
in Washington, D.C., 56-58, 61, 64
wealth at time of death, 165
weapons, refusal to develop, 347
Weekly Herald, 4
West, 1878 trip, 69-75
West Orange laboratory, 154-155, 163,204
and Western Union, 5, 7, 9,20
and William Croffut, 62-63, 147
work as excuse, 65

work, attachment to, 151, 191,232,
244-245,290

work environment, 29, 121,222-223,270
work schedule, 29, 66, 93, 229

Edison, Thomas Alva, Jr.
birth, 20, 45
death,286
Ecometer, 250, 348-349
education, 143
and father, 212, 215, 267, 338
Ford, gifts from, 242, 247-250
as inventor, 212-216
and stepmother, 212

Edison United Manufacturing Company, 167
Edison, William, 89,143,214,235,286,344
Eidoloscope, 207
Einstein, Albert, 274, 288
electric corset, 124
electric light

arc, 76-77, 78, 85-86, 89, 112-113, 114
Barker's demonstration of, 86-88
centralized power generation for, 128
Edison's claims disbelieved, 83, 86, 105, 108
Edison's first interest in, 75
Edison's optimistic claims, 81, 90-92, 96,

102, 129
history, 76-78
incandescent, 93-97,100-103,106-107,

109-112
"subdivision" of light, 80-83
Wallace-Farmer dynamo, 79

electric light, novel uses of, 144
electric pen, 19,22,298
electric shocks, 122-123, 172-173, 175-176,

178,180,181
"electrical dinner," 144-145
Electrical Exhibition, 213
Electro-Chemical Manufacturing Company,

298
Ellis Island, 225
Elman, Mischa, 223
Elmira, New York, 42
English Mechanic, 34
Equitable Building, 111
Erie Canal, 169
Essex County Jail, 263
Essig, Mark, 181
Etna Iron Works, 119-120
Eyck, Edward Ten, Jr., 295-296

Fabbri & Chauncey, 94
Fabbri, Egisto, 102
Farmer, Moses, 78
Farrar, Geraldine, 223
The Fast and the Furious, 21
Feeks, John E. H., 178-179
Ferry Street, 121
Field, George, 31
Firestone, Harvey, 253-254, 256-257,

278-279,350
Firestone, Harvey, Jr., 254
Firestone tires, advertising for, 255
Five-Dollar Day, 238
Fleet Street, 128
Ford, Clara, 245
Ford, Edsel, 268, 353
Ford Foundation, 287
Ford, Henry

anti-Semitism, 236-237, 255-256
automobile manufacturer, 216



INDEX\371

early encounters with Edison, 233-236
Edison, business relationship with, 236,

237-238,243-244,247,250-253
Edison, camping trips with, 253-257, 350
Edison, descriptions of, 165
Edison, friendship with, 160,235,238,239,

246-247,257-258
Edison Scholarship, judge for, 264
Edison, travel with, 245-246
Edison, veneration of, 234, 253, 281-282
Edison's rubber research, support for,

278-279

estate,287
family name, continuity of, 287-288
Fort Myers, home in, 239, 345
gift from Edison, 243
gifts to Edison's family, 242-243, 247-250,

346
Greenfield Village, 281
homes, 238, 239
at Light's Golden Jubilee, 281-282
on smoking, 239-241
unconcern about own limited knowledge,

275,281
wealth,280

Ford Motor Company, 235, 243, 246-247,
248-249,252-253

Ford, William Clay, Jr., 288
Fort Myers, Florida, 151,238,239,242,243,

278-279
Fort Wayne, Indiana, 6
Fox, Edwin

discovery of Edison competitor, 111
Edison, advice for, 88-89
Edison, longtime friend of, 37
gift of stock from Edison, 92
profile of Edison's electric light, 100-101
seeking access to labora tory, 316
in Wyoming with Edison, 71-72

Frank, Leo, 350-351
Fredonia, New York, 42
Frost, A. C, 345
Fulton, Robert, 2, 58

Galileo,58
Galli-Curci, Amelita, 223
garrote, 173

gas light, 77,81,84-85,85-86,94,124
gas utilities, 101, 124, 129, 180
Gates, Bill, 326
General Electric Company, 165, 187, 193,

262,279
General Post Office [London], 128
Genius to Sleep Under the Stars, 255
Gentleman Jack, 204
Gilliland, Ezra

fellow telegrapher with Edison, 293

Fort Myers, home in, 151,238,239, 345
ma tchmaker, 148
and North American Phonograph Company,

159

Railway Telegraph and Telephone Company,
146

Gilliland, Lillian, 147, 148, 150
Glass Blowers Trade Guild, 329
Glenmont

compared to quarters at Ogden mine, 191
isolation of, 194
kitchen appliances, 260
and Madeleine Edison, 221, 248
not replaced by concrete house, 228
overseen by Mina Edison, 155
sale of Pedder's house and furnishings,

152
Goerck Street, 168
Goodyear, Charles, 2, 60
Google,289
Gould, Jay, 20, 71,255-256
Gouraud, George, 82-83, 120, 157
Grand Trunk Railroad, 5, 292
Grant, Ulysses S., 88-89
Gray & Davis, 252
Green Mountains, 254
Greenfield Village, 281
Griffin, Stockton, 72-73, 94
Guillotin, Dr. [joseph Ignace], 174
guillotine, 173

Hammer, William, 128, 144, 153
Harding, Warren, 256
Haskell, Llewellyn, 326
Havana, Cuba, 110
Hawkins, Carolyn, 269, 272
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 149
Hayes, Rutherford, 57, 307
Heifetz, Jascha, 223
Heise, William, 202
Heller, Robert, 45-46
Hendricks, Gordon, 335
Hewlett-Packard,298
Hill, Percival, 241
Hinds, Ketcham, 125
Hipple, Joseph, 26
Hoboken, New Jersey, 43
Hoe & Company, 168
Holborn Viaduct, 128
Home Projecting Kinetoscope, 228-229
Homer, New York, 42
Hoover, Herbert, 281-282,285
Hotchkiss School, 267, 271
Housewives League, 264
How Success Is Won, 150
Hubbard, Gardiner, 52, 60
Hudson River, 64



372/INDEX

IBM,337
Indianapolis, Indiana, 6
Inductorium, 18,24
Ingersoll-Sergeant Drill Company, 208
Insull, Samuel

after market crash, 265-266
alternating current, advocate of, 183-184
central-station business, head of, 138-139
Edison's electric light business, managing,

165-171
as Edison's ghost-writer, 166
as Edison's proxy, 147, 324, 325
Gillilands' summer home, invited to, 148
leaving Edison's employ, 187
as own chief executive, 261-262
philanthropy, 262-263
Thomson-Houston, advocate of merger

with,186
urging Edison to liquidate stakes, 182

Insull Utility Investments, 265-266
Israel, Paul, 323, 325

Jackson, Mississippi, 167
Jamestown, New York, 42
Jehl, Francis, 98, 118, 123,285
Jenkins, c. Francis, 207-208
Jesus Christ, 9, 247
Jews, 236-237, 255-256,262
Jobs, Steve, 302, 311
Johnson, A. E., 222, 273
Johnson, Edward

alternating current, advocate for, 171
Bergmann & Company, 120
at Bijou Theatre, 139
Edison Lamp Company, 120
as Edison's proxy, 31, 56, 70,131-132
excitability, 24, 298
helmets for Blaine-Logan parade, 144
musical telephone, 24-26
phonograph, 33-36, 39,41-42,61,

105-106, 156
Jolson, Al, 224
Jordan, Michael, 288
Jordan,Sarah,103

Kasakove, Paul, 356
Keely, John Worrell, 46, 184-185
Kemmler, William, 177
kerosene light, 85
Kinetoscope Exhibiting Company, 201, 203
kinetoscope parlors, 200-201, 202-203
Koster and Bial's Music Hall, 209
Kreisler, Fritz, 223
Kruesi, John, 29, 35, 75, 133

La Dame aux Camilias, 99
Lake Superior, 193

Lane, Jodie, 320-321
Latham, Grey and Otway, 201, 203, 205, 206,

207

Latham, Woodville, 205, 206, 207
Lathrop, Mrs. W. c., 260
Lauste, Eugene, 205
Lawrence, Massachusetts, 94
Lawson, John, 289
Liberty Bonds, 279
Liebold, Ernest, 239-240, 244, 247-249,

250-252

Light's Golden Jubilee, 281-282, 286
Lincoln, Abraham, 1
Lindbergh, Charles, 264
Lippincott, Jesse, 158-159, 161, 163
Little Big Horn, Montana, 71
Llewellyn Park, 152
Lockport, New York, 42
London Times, 4
Los Angeles, California, 127
Los Angeles Times, 209-210
Louisville, Kentucky, 6
Lowrey, Grosvenor, 81-82, 90-91, 94, 107,

109, 113-116
Lyon, France, 76
Lyons, New York, 172

Macintosh computer, 302

MacKenzie, James, 5, 292
Madison Avenue French Academy, 143
Madison Square Garden, 207, 213
magnetic concentration, 189-190
Magno-Electric Vitalizer, 214, 215, 216
Mallory, Walter, 192, 193
Manufacture of Paper, 229
Marcus, Iowa, 218
Marey, Etienne-Jules, 33, 196
Marshall, Charles L., 199
Marshall, David Trumball, 108-109
Maryland state penitentiary, 124
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 9,265,

275

Maxim, Hiram, 111
Maxwell, William, 218, 269-270
Mayer, Alfred, 43
McCormack, John, 223
McCormick, Cyrus, 2
McCoy, Joseph, 266
McDonald, Forrest, 186, 265
McGowan, Frank, 318
McGraw-Edison,288
McLuhan, Marshall, 17
Meadowcroft, William, 246, 247
MediII, Joseph, 60
Melba, Nellie, 223
Memphis, Tennessee, 6
Menlo Park laboratory



INDEX\373

after-hours, 29
animals, electrical experiments on, 175-176
closure to public, 68-69, 87, 105, 106
description of, 21-22, 47-49
Edison Light directors' visit to, 90
Edison's move from, 117, 118
Edison's optimistic claims for, 154
financial support for, 170, 183
furnishings, 114
mining-related experiments, 189
profile by Edwin Fox, 100-101
public image of, 289-290
re-creation of, 281-282
requests sent to, 67

self-imposed insularity, 45, 66
visitors to, 51, 62, 93, 98-100, 103-105
young talent drawn to, 289

Menlo Park, New Jersey
electric light demonstration, 88, 102-104,

110
electric railroad, 108-109
fame of, 50
Francis Upton, arrival of, 93
history,20
isolation of, 266
reason for Edison's move to, 296-297

Mesabi Range, 193
Methodist Episcopal Church, 281
Metropolitan Opera House, 199, 220
Microsoft, 289, 326, 328
Milan, Ohio, 3
Miller, Jane, 283
Miller, Lewis, 148, 150, 155, 166,325
ModelT, 235, 236, 242
Modern Weapons for Fighting Fire, 229
Montessori, Maria, 222
Moore, William, 110, 318
Morgan, Frank, 335
Morgan,J., 130-132, 133, 136,281,324,333
Morse, Samuel, 2
motion picture technology, 195-199,201,

202,205-209
Muck, Karl, 223
Murray, Joseph, 18
Musser, Charles, 335
Muybridge, Eadweard, 198

Napolean, 10,247
Nassau Street, 121, 123,203,205
National Academy of Sciences, 56
National Broadcasting Company, 286
National Builder's Supply Association, 237
Naval Consulting Board, 259, 270
Nerney, Mary Childs, 285
New Bedford, Massachusetts, 167
New Jersey Soldiers' Relief Concert, 263
New Orleans, Louisiana, 330-331

New York American, 216
New York Daily Graphic, 25,26, 37, 54-55,

62,92
New York Evening Sun, 179
New York Herald

Edison, description of, 103-104
Edison's laboratory, exclusive access to,

100-101
editorial: "Edison's Eureka," 101
on electric light, 83,133-134
Tom Edison Jr., description of, 212-213

New York Morning Advertiser, 199
New York, New York

Bell's telephone concert, 25
Board of Alderman, 113-116, 178
Board of Underwriters, 133
Department of Public Works, 113
Edison rival first to open office, 111
Edison visits to, 98
electric light and power, 81, 85, 112, 113, 116
excessive noise of elevated railway, 74
illegal horse races, 21
phonograph concerts, 52, 65
real estate prices, 119
Sarah Berhnhardt's performances in, 98-99

New York Paper Barrel Company, 28
New York Sun

coinage of "Napolean of invention," 53
Edison profile, 44, 50, 54, 58
on Edison's celebrity, 73
on Edison's visit to Wallace workshop, 78
electric light, coverage of, 81, 88
phonograph, coverage of, 34

New York Times
on Brush's arc light, 77
on Edison Electric Light Company, 103, 133
on Edison's optimistic disposition, 232
on Edison's questionnaire, 274
on Edison's statements about cigarettes,

240-241
on electric light, 96, 133
on gas companies, 85
humorous comments about Edison, 53
on John Roach, 145
on Kemmler execution, 185
on musical telephone, 24, 25, 26
opposition to term "electrocution," 174
on Tom Edison Jr., 213
tributes,284
on value of industries Edison created, 280

New York Tribune, 104
New York Truth, 116
New York World

on dangers of electric wires, 173
denied glimpse of aerophone, 50
Edison interview about purpose of life, 163
Edison interview after trip West, 74, 75



374/INDEX

New York World (cont.)
Edison interview during honeymoon, 151
on Edison's inventions, 38
on Leonard-Cushing match, 202

Newark Daily Advertiser, 25
Newark, New Jersey, 13, 16, 19,25,45, 85
Newark Telegraph Works, 13
News Reporting Telegraph Company, 13, 15
Newton, Isaac, 58
Nixon, Richard, 48
North American Company, 262
North American Phonograph Company, 159,

161, 162, 163
North American Review, 180
Norton, Kansas, 260

Oakley, Annie, 213
Oberlin College, 263
Off-Hand Portraits of Prominent New

Yorkers, 156
Ogdensburg, New Jersey, 190,204
Ohio, Militia of the State of, 263
Orange Chronicle, 200
Orange, New Jersey, 263
Oregon Railway and Navigation Company, 106
Orton, William, 30, 32
Otis, Elisha Graves, 2
Ott, John, 284-285, 289, 359
Oz,197

Paderewski, Ignace Jan, 223
Paine, Thomas, 3, 4
Painter, Uriah, 55, 61, 68-69
Pake, George, 311
Palace Hotel, 85
Panama-Pacific International Exposition, 244,

250
Panic of 1893, 188, 198
Pantoptikon, 206
Paris, 31, 67
Paris Universal Exhibition, 67, 73, 196
Pattie, Adelina, 48
Peabody, Massachusetts, 93, 94
Pedder, Henry, 152
Pennsylvania Railroad, 26, 114
Pennsylvania, University of, 56, 111
Perfectionists, 326
Peters, Roderic, 355
Phantascope, 208, 209
Philadelphia Electrical Exhibition, 144
Philadelphia Inquirer, 57
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 47
Philadelphia Record, 31,33, 105
Philip Morris & Company, 241
phonograph

commercialization of, 39-45, 52-53, 84,
105-106,163

compatibility of vendors' formats, 220
concerts, 41-42, 61
cylinders, 219-220
dealers, 217, 218, 225, 227, 268-270
discs, 219-220
and Edison's celebrity, 2
Edison's fondness of, 55-56, 59
as generic term, 225
graphophone, competition with, 156-157,

160,161,327
humor, source of, 53-54, 302, 309
improvements, 40-41, 221
incomplete state, 42-43, 60, 83-84, 108, 160
initial demand for, 51-54
invention, 28-38
manufacture, 218
marketing, 43-44, 218-219, 226-227
naming, 31-32, 68
nickel-in-the-slot machine, 194-195, 199
office transcription, used for, 53,160, 161,

162,261
origins, 28-32, 49
at Paris Universal Exhibition, 67, 73
patents, 36, 38, 70
"perfected," 42, 158, 160-162
playing recorded music, 162,194-195,199
radio, challenge posed by, 276-277
and Scientific American, 33-35, 69-70, 86
toy, 105
uses for, 34, 35, 39,41,48-50

Phrenological Journal, 40
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 254
Plymouth, Vermont, 256
Ponselle, Rosa, 223
Pope, Edison & Company, 13
Pope Pius IX, 48
Port Huron, Michigan, 4, 17,263
Portland, Oregon, 107
Postman, Neil, 342
Preece, William, 20-22, 40
press

credulity, 66, 73-75, 83
Edison's imprimatur, 62-63
legal problems, 86
mythologizing, 44,50,58,59-60, 100-102
observation of unguarded Edison, 56-57
praise of Edison's manner, 48
seeking access, 88-89
selective disclosure by Edison, 37-38

Princeton University, 93, 314
Puskas, Theodore, 67, 81,308-309

Quadricycle,233
quadruplex telegraphy, 17-18,43

Rachmaninoff, Sergei, 220, 224, 340
Raff & Gammon, 208-209



INDEx\375

Railway Telegraph and Telephone Company,
146-147

Rawlins, Wyoming, 69, 72
Rector, Enoch, 201
Roach, John, 106, 119,145
Rockefeller, John D., Jr., 281
Rogers, Will, 281
Roman Catholics, 48
Roosevelt, Hilbourne, 65
Roosevelt, Theodore, 65,281,292, 358
Rosapelly, C. L., 33
Roselle, New Jersey, 276
Royal Society, 76, 77
Russell, Oliver, 39

Sachem,272
San Diego, California, 246
San Francisco, California, 73, 85, 244-246
San Francisco Chronicle, 245
San Jose Brush Electric Company, 321
San Jose, California, 127
"Sandow, the Strongman" [Eugene Sandow],

200,201
Santa Fe Watch Company, 225
Santa Rosa, California, 246
Saturday Night Live, 343
Sawyer, William, 101
Schell, Frank, 358
Schenectady, New York, 169,221
Schickel, Richard, 292
Schumann-He ink, Ernestine, 223
Scientific American, 33-37,44,47,69-70, 86,

144

Scott, Leon, 302
Segredor, John, 109-110
Semiconductor Energy Laboratory, 288
Serrell, Lemuel, 86
Sesame Street, 228
Shakespeare,281
Sharon, William, 85
Sheffield Scientific School, 235
Sherman Anti-Trust Act, 175
Shibuya Jugiro, 185
Shunpei Yamazaki, 288-289, 361
Simon, Paul, 343
Sing Sing, 185
Sloane, John, 348
Smith, Bessie, 224
Smith, Lucien, 2
Smithsonian Institution, 56
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Ani-

mals,176
Sorenson, Charles, 257
Sprague, Frank, 166,329
Spruce Mills, Iowa, 26
Spruce Street, 121
St. Georges Church, 132

St. Louis, Missouri, 69, 73
St. Paul's School, 212
Stanford University, 318
Stanley, Henry, 10
Starr, J. W., 78
Stephenson, Robert, 292
Stevens Institute of Technology, 43
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 77
Stowkowski, Leopold, 223
Stratford Junction, Ontario,S
Stravinsky, Igor, 224

Tainter, Charles Sumner, 157
talking doll, 162-163
Tate, Alfred

as Edison's proxy, 170

kinetoscope parlor, 198,200-201
on marketing of phonograph, 162
observations about Edison and phonograph,

157, 158, 161, 194
witness to Edison's reaction to merger,

187

telegraphy, history of, 17
telephone, 2, 23-25, 27, 45,57
Tesla, Nikola, 166, 329
Tetrazzini, Luisa, 223
Thomas A. Edison Central Station Construc

tion Department, 167, 168
Thomas A. Edison, Inc.

acquired by McGraw Electric, 288
Charles Edison at, 267, 268, 270-273
Edison Shop of East Orange, 269
formation,261
improvements in working conditions, 271
kitchen appliances, 276, 277-278
radio-phonographs, 276, 280
record production, end of, 279

Thomas A. Edison, Jr. and William Holzer
Steel and Iron Process Company, 214

Thomas A. Edison, Jr., Chemical Company,
212,215,216

Thomas A. Edison: A Modern Olympian, 285
Thomas Alva Edison Foundation, 360
Thompson, Charles, 331
Thompson, H. O., 121
Thomson-Houston Electric Company, 171,

182-183,186,333
Thumb, Tom, 61
Tiffany and Company, 112
Time,262
Tom Sawyer, 259
Topeka, Kansas, 225
Toscanini, Arturo, 223
Towns, Mrs. Mirabeau L., 263-264
Trinity Church, 21
Troeber, William, 231
Twain, Mark, 2, 288, 292



376/INDEX

U.S. House of Representatives, 58
U.S. Naval Observatory, 57
U.S. Navy, 259
U.S. Patent Office, 41,51,56
U.S. Postal Service, 216
U.S. Senate, 58
U.S. Supreme Court, 185
Unger, William, 14-15
United States Electric Lighting Company,

111

United States Illuminating Company, 172, 173,
179

University of Chicago, 274
Upton, Francis

acceptance of position with Edison, 93-97,
314

Charles Clarke, classmate of, 123
field testing of wire insulation, 110
investor in Edison Lamp Company, 120
stock sale, 103
transport of lightbulbs, 107

Vanderbilt, William, 84, 129-130
Vanity Fair Tobacco and Cigarettes, 50
Verlet, Alice, 246
VHS,171
Victor Talking Machine Company, 219, 220,

223,225,226,231
Victrola, 219, 225, 246, 247, 260
Vienna, Austria, 86
Villard, Henry, 106, 155-156, 182, 183,

262

Vincent, John, 68, 148
Virginia City, Nevada, 73
Vitascope, 209, 210
von Helmholtz, Hermann, 93
von Rothschild, Albert Salomon, 86
vote recorder, 8

Wabash, Indiana, 126, 127
Walker, Jimmy, 360
Wall Street, 121,236-237,255
Wallace, William, 78
The War of the Worlds, 54
Ward, Dr. Leslie, 72-73
Washington, District of Columbia, 47, 56-58,

61,207,209
Washington Herald, 53
Watson, Thomas A., 23
Watson, Thomas J., 337
Waxahachie, Texas, 246
Weder, Donald E., 361
Welch, E. Baker, 294
Welles, Orson, 54
West Orange, New Jersey, 152,266
West Virginia University, 205

Western Union

Edison, contract with, 20
Edison, employment of,S, 7
Edison, resignation of, 9
electric light, interest in, 81, 90
head of telephone department, 129
and Jay Gould, 71
John Feeks, lineman, 178
Kemmler execution, office for, 184
spare cable capacity, 146
telephones, interest in, 30, 32

Westinghouse Electric Company, 171, 174,
175,181,330,333

Westinghouse, George
alternating current, defense of, 177-178,

180-181

alternating current, use of, 174
brand name, 260
Edison, exploration of rapprochement with,

175
electric chair, tie to, 173
reaction to Edison's criticism, 179-180
reaction to Kemmler's execution, 185

Westinghouse radio, 276
White, Andrew, 308-309
White House, 57
White Mountains, 150
Whitney, Eli, 2,60
Wilber, Zenas, 56, 57, 306
Wizard of Menlo Park

application to son, 212, 213
cartoonists mocked, 111
coinage, 55
Edison personally addressed as, 146
effect on Edison's ambitions, 80, 139
public's faith in, 101
term of derision, 199
use in advertising, 211, 225, 226

Wizard's Ink Tablets, 214, 215
Woman's Club of Orange, 264
Wood, John Jethro, 2
Woodbridge Independent, 25
World's Columbian Exposition [Chicago

World's Fair, 1893], 197, 198,262, 336
World's Industrial and Cotton Centennial

Exposition, 147-148
Wright, Orville, 281

Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 311

Yale University, 235
YMCA, 262, 263
Yosemite National Park, 73

Zimbalist, Efrem, 223
Zobian, James, 241



 



 



